 Demand for water cannot be an 'afterthought' in AI push - ABC News 
 Skip to main content Skip to news navigation, settings and search Explore the ABC
 More from ABC 
 Close menu ABC   ABC News 
   ABC iview 
   ABC listen 
   Kids & Students 
   Indigenous 
   Information & Services 
 Editorial Policies 
 Read our editorial guiding principles 
 Follow the ABC 
 news 
 iview 
 listen 
 Loading 
 ABC News Just In 
 For You 
 Politics 
 World 
 Business 
 Analysis 
 Sport 
 Lifestyle 
 Entertainment 
 Quizzes 
 More Search 
 News Home Just In 
 For You 
 Analysis 
 Rural 
 Watch Live 
 Health 
 Indigenous 
 Politics 
 Science 
 Deep Time 
 Elections 
 World 
 Environment 
 Investigations 
 Business 
 Local news 
 Quizzes 
 Sport AFL 
 NRL 
 Football 
 Tennis 
 Cricket 
 Netball 
 Lifestyle Wellbeing 
 Relationships & Family 
 Food & Recipes 
 Personal Finance 
 Home & Garden 
 Entertainment TV & Movies 
 Books 
 Music 
 Pop Culture 
 Arts 
 Facebook 
 YouTube 
 Instagram 
 Twitter 
 Emergency
 Backstory
 Newsletters
 中文新闻
 BERITA BAHASA INDONESIA
 TOK PISIN
 Appearance (BETA) 
 Follow system settings
 Select an option 
 Always light 
 Always dark 
 Follow system settings 
 ABC iView 
 ABC Listen 
 ABC News News Home 
 Demand for water cannot be an 'afterthought' in AI push 
 Share Share article 
 Demand for water cannot be an 'afterthought' in AI push
 A
 By Ahmed Yussuf
 Topic: AI
 Posted Wed 10 Dec 2025 at 5:55am Wed 10 Dec 2025 at 5:55am Wed 10 Dec 2025 at 5:55am , updated Wed 10 Dec 2025 at 9:14am Wed 10 Dec 2025 at 9:14am Wed 10 Dec 2025 at 9:14am 
 Australia saw the second largest investment in data centres last year, second only to the United States. ( Supplied: Microsoft ) 
 In short:
 Australia has more than 250 data centres and more in the pipeline, prompting experts to warn against using drinking water to cool servers.
 It comes after the Commonwealth announced its National AI Plan after a two-year consultation period.
 One water authority is already exploring the use of recycled waste water for data centres.
 abc.net.au/news/demand-for-data-centre-water-in-ai-push/106102208
 Link copied 
 Share Share article 
 Australia's data centres should be built near waste treatment plants to avoid using drinking water to run the thirsty facilities, according to one of the country's leading experts in stormwater treatment.
 The Commonwealth unveiled last week its 37-page National AI Plan which sets out a road map to drive the development and adoption of artificial intelligence by bolstering investment in skills training and data centres that store servers.
 The United Nations Environment Programme has stressed that data centres "consume large amounts of energy and water, and we know that consumption is only going to grow" around the world.
 Loading... University of Melbourne's Professor Tim Fletcher, an urban ecohydrologist, said governments needed to start planning now because Australia was already drought-prone and water scarce.
 The World Economic Forum estimated a one-megawatt data centre could consume up to 25.5 million litres of water each year just for cooling, comparable to the daily water use of about 300,000 people.
 "Global AI demand is expected to consume 4.2 to 6.6 billion cubic metres of water by 2027," the UN said. 
 The International Energy Agency estimated data centres would drive more than 20 per cent of electricity demand between now and 2030.
 Australia's data centres consumed about 4 terawatt hours of electricity in 2024, about two per cent of grid-supplied power, and electricity demand from these users was expected to triple by 2030.
 Australia saw the world second largest investment in data centres last year, behind only the United States, with about $10 billion spent.
 Professor Fletcher pointed to the challenges ahead.
 "First of all is what water will we provide to data centres? And then the next question that flows from that is, well, therefore, where should we put them?" he said.
 " We are talking really significant amounts of water. " 
 What do we know about data centre water use?
 These centres are physical facilities that store and run IT infrastructure, such as software and data.
 The key components include routers, firewalls, storage systems, and servers, and requirements elements include an uninterrupted power supply and a cooling system.
 Australia has more than 250 data centres and most are located in the most populous cities — Melbourne and Sydney.
 Water is required to cool the servers.
 For example, a one megawatt (MW) data centre consumes about 25.5 million litres of water a year for cooling .
 A hyperscale data centre , specifically used for AI, has the capacity of about 100MW or more. It consumes the same amount of power as 100,000 homes annually.
 Sydney and Melbourne Water authorities are already contending with the potential increased water consumption by data centres.
 In July, Greater Western Water was assessing 19 data centre applications that requested to use nearly 20 gigalitres of water a year, on par with the water usage of 330,000 Melburnians.
 The water body said it currently had about 21 data centre proposals across stages of development.
 "We assess each proposal to ensure any new development is sustainable, and does not negatively impact existing customers," said Ian Burton, general manager of asset planning and delivery at Greater Western Water.
 Is Australia's promised green hydrogen industry ever going to happen?
 Billions of dollars in private investment are being pulled out of green hydrogen projects.
 Sydney Water has projected that data centres could use about a quarter of the city's annual drinking water by the end of the decade.
 University of Sydney's Professor Stuart Khan, who specialises in urban water management, drew a comparison with green hydrogen.
 "Water was an afterthought for the hydrogen industry," Professor Khan said. 
 "Understanding where the water's going to come from reliably is going to be a key thing for data centres in terms of where we approve their locations, just as it would be for energy."
 Could we better utilise existing water supplies?
 Professor Fletcher said there were alternatives to using drinking water to cool data centres.
 He suggested greater focus on reusing wastewater and building data centres close to treatment plants.
 He pointed to the example of one treatment plant in Werribee, in Melbourne's west, which was responsible for processing about 50 per cent of the city's wastewater
 "If you get the planning of where these things are built you could have a really large supply of water that's having no impact on our potable water security," he said.
 "And indeed it reduces the amount of water we have to discharge to the environment, in the case of Werribee, to the ocean."
 Loading... Professor Fletcher believed investment in stormwater storage could also be an option.
 "Wastewater is much more readily available," he said.
 "Stormwater would take more investment, but the wastewater is right there and could be grabbed right now at very, very low cost."
 Melbourne Water said it was exploring opportunities to use recycled water for data centres.
 The water body's executive general manager, Chris Brace, said it was working with the data centre sector to understand its plans for growth.
 "Our position is that large industrial users of waters, like data centres, should prioritise the use of non-drinking water, including recycled water and stormwater," Mr Brace said. 
 Melbourne Water said its exploring the use of recycled water for the city's data centres. ( ABC Illawarra: Justin Huntsdale ) 
 One of the companies working on providing recycled water is Hydroleap, which operates across the Asia-Pacific region including in Singapore and Australia.
 Chief executive Mohammad Sherafatmand, an environmental and chemical engineer, said wastewater from treatment plants was ideal for data centres.
 But there were other options, such as breweries, which could provide water.
 "[At a] minimum per litre of the brews that get generated there are nearly five to six litres of wastewater … so you are talking about a big source of water," he said.
 "What happens currently to it … [is] a very, very minimal treatment and just spread it out on agriculture."
 How are data centres managing water consumption?
 There are two types of cooling tower systems used in data centres, closed and open loops.
 Open loop systems consume more water but use much less energy, according to Dr Sherafatmand.
 DeepSeek makes AI cheaper, but energy demands will keep growing
 Despite the energy innovations of artificial intelligence newcomer DeepSeek's models, AI power requirements as a whole are predicted to rise.
 The National AI Plan pointed out CDC Data Centres' use of closed loop cooling.
 "CDC is … a leader in water conservation, with its closed-loop LiquidCoreTM cooling system consuming near-zero water, saving billions of litres of water annually across 16 CDC-operated data centres in Australia and New Zealand," the report said.
 It has plans to build three more, including one in Sydney which will be the biggest data centre campus in the Southern Hemisphere.
 A spokesperson for CDC Data Centres said site planning was a complicated process which required taking into consideration environmental, customer and commercial factors.
 "Unlike other data centres, CDC designs its facilities to eliminate water consumption for primary cooling purposes," a spokesperson said. 
 "In other words, CDC's facilities are similar to other commercial properties, where water consumption is a function of the number of people occupying that facility."
 Closed cooling systems can save between 50 and 75 per cent of water used by data centres. ( Supplied: Google ) 
 University of New South Wales' Scientia Professor Toby Walsh said the closed loop cooling system helped reduce water consumption.
 The technology is estimated to save between 50 and 75 per cent of water used by data centres.
 "If you're willing to build and put the effort in and spend a bit more money on energy you can use closed water cycle cooling systems where the water is recirculated," he said.
 "Once it's taken the heat away then you bring the water back.
 " You don't actually have to evaporate the water and lose it permanently. " 
 Share options Copy link 
 Facebook 
 X (formerly Twitter) 
 See more ABC coverage in your search results
 Make ABC a preferred source in Google 
 Top Stories
 Sydney Swans coach 'disappointed' as four players linked to sexual assault investigation 
 Topic: AFL
 Origin Energy hack traced to Accenture's Manila office 
 Topic: Cyber Crime
 Labor prepared to fast-track fix to negative gearing 'widow tax' 
 Topic: Tax
 Two Coalition MPs cross the floor to vote against gambling ad reform 
 LIVE
 Former Alan Jones colleague tells court of currying favour through texts 
 Topic: Courts
 Related stories
 Government drops AI 'mandatory guardrails', reveals road map on data centres 
 Topic: AI
 Data centre spending spree and housing boom drive economic growth 
 Topic: Economic Growth
 A quarter of your water. Could this be the true cost of AI? 
 Topic: Environmental Impacts
 AI could be the ultimate test of Australia's democracy 
 Topic: Analysis
 Related topics
 AI
 Australia
 NSW
 Recycling and Waste Management
 VIC
 Water Resources
 Top Stories 
 Sydney Swans coach 'disappointed' as four players linked to sexual assault investigation 
 Topic: AFL
 Origin Energy hack traced to Accenture's Manila office 
 Topic: Cyber Crime
 Labor prepared to fast-track fix to negative gearing 'widow tax' 
 Topic: Tax
 Two Coalition MPs cross the floor to vote against gambling ad reform 
 LIVE
 Former Alan Jones colleague tells court of currying favour through texts 
 Topic: Courts
 Just In
 David Warner leaves court with drink driving conviction and $1.5k fine 
 Topic: Courts
 Tue 18 Aug 2026 at 2:01pm Tue 18 Aug 2026 at 2:01pm Tue 18 Aug 2026 at 2:01pm 
 Why Tallis Duncan could be the answer for Australia's World Cup shortage 
 Analysis by Nick Campton
 Tue 18 Aug 2026 at 1:48pm Tue 18 Aug 2026 at 1:48pm Tue 18 Aug 2026 at 1:48pm 
 Weatherald dropped from Test squad after stunning loss to Bangladesh 
 Topic: Cricket
 Tue 18 Aug 2026 at 1:43pm Tue 18 Aug 2026 at 1:43pm Tue 18 Aug 2026 at 1:43pm 
 Better late than never as high school receives library book 72 years late 
 Topic: Books
 Tue 18 Aug 2026 at 1:40pm Tue 18 Aug 2026 at 1:40pm Tue 18 Aug 2026 at 1:40pm 
 More Just In 
 Back to top 
 ABC News Contact ABC News Your home of Australian stories, conversations and events that shape our nation.
 This service may include material from Agence France-Presse (AFP), APTN, Reuters, AAP, CNN and the BBC World Service which is copyright and cannot be reproduced.
 Follow ABC News
 Sections
 ABC News Home 
 Just In 
 For You 
 Watch Live News 
 Live ABC NewsRadio 
 Politics 
 Elections 
 Australia 
 World 
 Sport 
 Live Sport 
 Rural 
 Business 
 Analysis 
 Science 
 Health 
 Lifestyle 
 Entertainment 
 Quizzes 
 More Topics 
 News in Language
 Chinese 中文 
 Tok Pisin 
 Berita Bahasa Indonesia 
 Related
 ABC News app 
 Local News 
 ABC Emergency 
 ABC Indigenous 
 ABC Religion & Ethics 
 ABC Asia 
 ABC Pacific 
 Music & Audio
 ABC Listen Home 
 triple j 
 Live Radio 
 Movies & TV
 ABC iview Home 
 List of ABC Shows 
 Live TV 
 TV Guide 
 Kids & Students
 BTN 
 Education 
 Heywire 
 Takeover 
 ABC Kids 
 Get the ABC News AM newsletter
 Get the latest ABC News delivered to your email inbox
 Email address 
 Subscribe 
 Your information is being handled in accordance with the ABC Privacy Collection Statement . 
 All ABC newsletters
 Stay informed and connected with the ABC. Covering a wide range of topics and brands including News, iview, listen, and more.
 Browse all ABC newsletters 
 ABC home Information & Services
 Editorial Policies 
 Accessibility 
 Help 
 Contact Us 
 Commercial 
 Careers 
 About the ABC 
 Privacy Policy 
 Terms of Use 
 © 2026 ABC 
 Follow the ABC
 We acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Australians and Traditional Custodians of the lands where we live, learn and work.
 
