 Hume City Council sounds alarm on 'tidal wave' of data centre water applications - ABC News 
 Skip to main content Skip to news navigation, settings and search Explore the ABC
 More from ABC 
 Close menu ABC   ABC News 
   ABC iview 
   ABC listen 
   Kids & Students 
   Indigenous 
   Information & Services 
 Editorial Policies 
 Read our editorial guiding principles 
 Follow the ABC 
 news 
 iview 
 listen 
 Loading 
 ABC News Just In 
 For You 
 Politics 
 World 
 Business 
 Analysis 
 Sport 
 Lifestyle 
 Entertainment 
 Quizzes 
 More Search 
 News Home Just In 
 For You 
 Analysis 
 Rural 
 Watch Live 
 Health 
 Indigenous 
 Politics 
 Science 
 Deep Time 
 Elections 
 World 
 Environment 
 Investigations 
 Business 
 Local news 
 Quizzes 
 Sport AFL 
 NRL 
 Football 
 Tennis 
 Cricket 
 Netball 
 Lifestyle Wellbeing 
 Relationships & Family 
 Food & Recipes 
 Personal Finance 
 Home & Garden 
 Entertainment TV & Movies 
 Books 
 Music 
 Pop Culture 
 Arts 
 Facebook 
 YouTube 
 Instagram 
 Twitter 
 Emergency
 Backstory
 Newsletters
 中文新闻
 BERITA BAHASA INDONESIA
 TOK PISIN
 Appearance (BETA) 
 Follow system settings
 Select an option 
 Always light 
 Always dark 
 Follow system settings 
 ABC iView 
 ABC Listen 
 ABC News News Home 
 Hume City Council sounds alarm on 'tidal wave' of data centre water applications 
 Share Share article 
 Hume City Council sounds alarm on 'tidal wave' of data centre water applications
 By Leanne Wong
 Topic: Local Government
 Posted Tue 26 Aug 2025 at 9:14am Tue 26 Aug 2025 at 9:14am Tue 26 Aug 2025 at 9:14am , updated Wed 27 Aug 2025 at 4:56pm Wed 27 Aug 2025 at 4:56pm Wed 27 Aug 2025 at 4:56pm 
 Hume City Council will develop a plan on how to manage the energy and water requirement of data centres in its municipality. ( Supplied: Google ) 
 In short:
 A council in Melbourne's outer north has voted for more scrutiny over applications for resource-intensive data centres, with its deputy mayor warning the significant volumes of water they require could jeopardise new housing and population growth. 
 The ABC has previously revealed Greater Western Water was assessing 19 applications from data centres to use up to 20 gigalitres of water a year.
 What's next?
 The Hume City Council is also calling on the Victorian government to strengthen its planning controls in relation to data centres.
 abc.net.au/news/hume-council-votes-on-data-centres-energy-water-management-plan/105694556
 Link copied 
 Share Share article 
 A deputy mayor in Melbourne's outer north has sounded the alarm on the environmental impact of data centres, saying they pose a "wicked problem" that could threaten the region's housing and population growth.
 The warning from Naim Kurt of the Hume City Council comes as new documents reveal the extent to which resource-intensive data centres are targeting land in Melbourne's north.
 Retail water corporation Yarra Valley Water has received seven applications to draw water from the municipal supply to cool proposed data centres, according to Freedom of Information documents seen by the ABC.
 All seven fall within the City of Hume, including one application near Mickleham which has been approved to consume up to 3,940 megalitres (ML) of water annually — enough to supply 66,000 Melburnians, or the population of Craigieburn, for a year.
 A second application has been approved while the remaining five are under consideration.
 Naim Kurt is the deputy mayor of the council in Melbourne's outer north. ( ABC News: Margaret Paul ) 
 In comparison, five existing data centres within Yarra Valley Water's catchment, in areas such as East Burwood and Montrose, used just 47.6 ML last year.
 "This is a tidal wave or tsunami that is going to hit us in the next five years, and it's really important that the government gets on the front foot," Mr Kurt said.
 Calls for statewide framework
 On Monday night, the Hume council voted to develop a framework for assessing data centre applications to ensure sustainable resource use, becoming the first council in Victoria to do so.
 Melbourne data centre water usage
 Documents show Greater Western Water is assessing 19 data centre applications requesting to use a total of 20 gigalitres of water annually — the same amount 330,000 Melburnians used in the last financial year.
 The motion also called on the Victorian government to strengthen its planning controls in relation to data centres, due to concerns over their vast water and energy consumption.
 The ABC has previously revealed water corporation Greater Western Water was assessing 19 water applications from proposed data centres in Melbourne's west, totalling up to 20 gigalitres of water a year.
 Mr Kurt, who brought the council motion, said the absence of a statewide framework for assessing data centre applications was "hugely concerning" and could lead to areas with available land in Melbourne's west and north being disproportionately affected.
 He was particularly concerned about whether the centres' significant water requirements could co-exist with the needs of a growing population.
 "Data centres are essential infrastructure, but they do present a wicked problem," Mr Kurt said.
 " In a community like ours, where housing supply is needed and housing affordability is an issue … there's a question to be asked about how these facilities operate and what they give back in terms of jobs. " 
 Tech giant Amazon previously received ministerial approval for a new data centre in the Hume municipality. ( Supplied: Amazon Web Services ) 
 Ministerial approvals "ram through" applications
 Under the government's Development Facilitation Program, companies can lodge permit applications directly to the Planning Minister, rather than local council, for projects considered to be a "significant economic development".
 That includes data centres with a development cost of at least $20 million in metropolitan Melbourne or $10 million in regional Victoria.
 Last year, tech giant Amazon sought and received ministerial approval for a new $250 million data centre in Craigieburn, bypassing Hume council.
 Data centres are resource-intensive infrastructure. ( ABC News: Stephanie Chalmers ) 
 Mr Kurt said he was concerned data centre companies were increasingly seeking ministerial approval in order to "ram through" their applications without council or community oversight.
 He said he was also frustrated by the lack of transparency regarding their environmental impact.
 "I've found that the process has been quite opaque in trying to get environmental reports, trying to find out information," Mr Kurt said.
 "How many data centres might be coming [to Hume] is news to me as well."
 In a statement, Yarra Valley Water's Bridie Fennessy said the volumes of water used by each data centre varied, and that Yarra Valley Water was in active discussions with data centres.
 "Maintaining a safe and reliable water supply for our customers is our top consideration whenever we assess a request for large volumes of water," Ms Fennessy said.
 "Data centres play a vital role in Victoria's economic development, and we're working with them to explore potential water-efficiency measures, including recycled water, while supporting their growth."
 A Victorian government spokesperson said any proposal was considered on its merits, including environmental impacts, and relevant councils are notified at pre-application and application stage.
 "Data centres are an important part of our state's future — when data centre companies invest in Victoria they drive job creation and grow the economy," the spokesperson said.
 "Victoria is leading the way in embracing advances in digital technology as well as ensuring investment in data centres is planned, sustainable and meets the needs of the community."
 Share options Copy link 
 Facebook 
 X (formerly Twitter) 
 See more ABC coverage in your search results
 Make ABC a preferred source in Google 
 Top Stories
 Sydney Swans coach 'disappointed' as four players linked to sexual assault investigation 
 Topic: AFL
 Origin Energy hack traced to Accenture's Manila office 
 Topic: Cyber Crime
 Labor prepared to fast-track fix to negative gearing 'widow tax' 
 Topic: Tax
 Two Coalition MPs cross the floor to vote against gambling ad reform 
 LIVE
 Former Alan Jones colleague tells court of currying favour through texts 
 Topic: Courts
 Popular now
 Four Sydney Swans players linked to Melbourne investigation 
 Topic: AFL
 Two Coalition MPs cross the floor to vote against gambling ad reform 
 LIVE
 Body found buried under cubby house in Logan backyard 
 Topic: Homicide
 Related topics
 Broadmeadows
 Information Technology Industry
 Local Government
 Top Stories 
 Sydney Swans coach 'disappointed' as four players linked to sexual assault investigation 
 Topic: AFL
 Origin Energy hack traced to Accenture's Manila office 
 Topic: Cyber Crime
 Labor prepared to fast-track fix to negative gearing 'widow tax' 
 Topic: Tax
 Two Coalition MPs cross the floor to vote against gambling ad reform 
 LIVE
 Former Alan Jones colleague tells court of currying favour through texts 
 Topic: Courts
 Just In
 David Warner leaves court with drink driving conviction and $1.5k fine 
 Topic: Courts
 Tue 18 Aug 2026 at 2:01pm Tue 18 Aug 2026 at 2:01pm Tue 18 Aug 2026 at 2:01pm 
 Why Tallis Duncan could be the answer for Australia's World Cup shortage 
 Analysis by Nick Campton
 Tue 18 Aug 2026 at 1:48pm Tue 18 Aug 2026 at 1:48pm Tue 18 Aug 2026 at 1:48pm 
 Weatherald dropped from Test squad after stunning loss to Bangladesh 
 Topic: Cricket
 Tue 18 Aug 2026 at 1:43pm Tue 18 Aug 2026 at 1:43pm Tue 18 Aug 2026 at 1:43pm 
 Better late than never as high school receives library book 72 years late 
 Topic: Books
 Tue 18 Aug 2026 at 1:40pm Tue 18 Aug 2026 at 1:40pm Tue 18 Aug 2026 at 1:40pm 
 More Just In 
 Back to top 
 ABC News Contact ABC News Your home of Australian stories, conversations and events that shape our nation.
 This service may include material from Agence France-Presse (AFP), APTN, Reuters, AAP, CNN and the BBC World Service which is copyright and cannot be reproduced.
 Follow ABC News
 Sections
 ABC News Home 
 Just In 
 For You 
 Watch Live News 
 Live ABC NewsRadio 
 Politics 
 Elections 
 Australia 
 World 
 Sport 
 Live Sport 
 Rural 
 Business 
 Analysis 
 Science 
 Health 
 Lifestyle 
 Entertainment 
 Quizzes 
 More Topics 
 News in Language
 Chinese 中文 
 Tok Pisin 
 Berita Bahasa Indonesia 
 Related
 ABC News app 
 Local News 
 ABC Emergency 
 ABC Indigenous 
 ABC Religion & Ethics 
 ABC Asia 
 ABC Pacific 
 Music & Audio
 ABC Listen Home 
 triple j 
 Live Radio 
 Movies & TV
 ABC iview Home 
 List of ABC Shows 
 Live TV 
 TV Guide 
 Kids & Students
 BTN 
 Education 
 Heywire 
 Takeover 
 ABC Kids 
 Get the ABC News AM newsletter
 Get the latest ABC News delivered to your email inbox
 Email address 
 Subscribe 
 Your information is being handled in accordance with the ABC Privacy Collection Statement . 
 All ABC newsletters
 Stay informed and connected with the ABC. Covering a wide range of topics and brands including News, iview, listen, and more.
 Browse all ABC newsletters 
 ABC home Information & Services
 Editorial Policies 
 Accessibility 
 Help 
 Contact Us 
 Commercial 
 Careers 
 About the ABC 
 Privacy Policy 
 Terms of Use 
 © 2026 ABC 
 Follow the ABC
 We acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Australians and Traditional Custodians of the lands where we live, learn and work.
 
