PA2504032 – 1 Oroya
Drive and 435 Mount
Atkinson Road,
Truganina




                                Officer Assessment Report
                          Development Approvals & Design




               OFFICIAL
Executive Summary

 Key Information          Details

 Application No:          PA2504032

 Received:                28/10/2025

 Statutory Days:          41

 Applicant:               The Trust Company (Australia) Limited as trustee of GDCF Truganina Trust c/- Aurecon

 Planning Scheme:         Melton

 Land Address:            1 Oroya Drive and 435 Mount Atkinson Road, Truganina

 Proposal:                Use and development of the site for a data centre and display of directional signage

 Development Value:       $ 422,000,000 million

 Why is the Minister      In accordance with the schedule to Clause 72.01 of the Planning Scheme, the Minister for Planning
 responsible?             is the responsible authority for an application for use and development of land to which Clause
                          53.22 – Significant Economic Development applies.

 Why is a permit          Clause           Control                                  Trigger
 required?

 Zone:                    Clause           Urban Growth Zone – Schedule             To use the land for a data centre
                          37.07-9          9

                                                                                    Construct a building or construct or carry out
                                           Urban Growth Zone – Schedule
                          Clause                                                    works
                                           9
                          37.07-11


                          Clause           Industrial Zone 1                        To use the land for the purposes of a data centre
                          33.01-1


                          Clause
                                           Industrial Zone 1                        Construct a building or construct or carry out
                          33.01-4
                                                                                    works

 Overlays:                Clause 44.11     Infrastructure Contributions             No permit required
                                           Overlay – Schedule 3

 Particular Provisions:   Clause           Signs                                    For the display of more than one directional sign
                          52.05-12
                          Clause 52.06     Car parking                              No permit required
                          Clause 52.34
                                           Bicycle facilities                       No permit required

 Cultural Heritage:       A CHMP is not required as the site is not within an area of Aboriginal Cultural Heritage Sensitivity.

 Total Site Area:         20.7             hectares

 Height:                  34m              metres

 Land Uses:                    Dwellings               Office                     Retail                            Other

                                    -                      -                         -                          Data centre

 Parking:                  Cars                    Motorcycles                                            Bicycles

                          58 spaces                      N/A                                               16 spaces




                                                                PA2504032 – 1 Oroya Drive and 435 Mount Atkinson Road, Truganina     Page 1

                                                         OFFICIAL
Referral Authorities:   WorkSafe Victoria (s55 – determining) – no objection
                        AusNet Transmission Group (s55 – determining) – no objection
                        Melton City Council (informal) – no objection
                        Fire Rescue Victoria (informal) – no response
                        Melbourne Water (informal) – no objection
                        Greater Western Water (informal) – no objection

Public Notice:          Notice of the application under section 52 of the Act was not required, other than to Council,
                        because:
                            •    Pursuant to Clause 37.07-13, an application under any provision of this scheme which is
                                 generally in accordance with the precinct structure plan applying to the land is exempt from
                                 the notice requirements of section 52(1)(a), (b) and (d), the decision requirements of
                                 section 64(1), (2) and (3) and the review rights of section 82(1) of the Act, unless the
                                 schedule to this zone specifies otherwise.

                            •    There are no specific requirements in Schedule 9 to the UGZ relevant to ‘industrial
                                 employment’ land. The proposal is generally in accordance with the PSP as detailed further
                                 in this report, and as such is exempt from the notice requirements.

                            •    Display of more than one directional sign is not exempt under Clause 52.05. It was
                                 considered, however, display of the proposed signs would not cause material detriment to
                                 any person and therefore no notice was required.
Delegates List:         Approval to determine under delegation received on 19 December 2025.




                                                         PA2504032 – 1 Oroya Drive and 435 Mount Atkinson Road, Truganina   Page 2

                                                     OFFICIAL
Proposal

Application Documents
1. The key documents in the application process were as follows:

      Documents                                                    Description

      Decision Plans                                               Architectural Plans prepared by Woods Bagot, dated 24/10/2025

                                                                   Landscape Report and Plan prepared by Aurecon, dated
                                                                   24/10/2024

      Other Assessment Documents                                   Aboriginal and Historic Heritage Due Diligence Assessment
                                                                   prepared by Aurecon, dated 24/10/2024

                                                                   Contaminated Land Report prepared by Aurecon, dated
                                                                   24/10/2024

                                                                   Preliminary Hazard Analysis prepared by Aurecon, dated
                                                                   4/5/2026

                                                                   Ecology Impact Assessment report (Memorandum) prepared by
                                                                   Aurecon, dated 24/10/2024

                                                                   Green Travel Plan prepared by Aurecon, dated 24/10/2024

                                                                   Environmental Noise Report prepared by Aurecon, dated
                                                                   24/10/2024

                                                                   Town Planning Report prepared by Aurecon, dated 24/10/2024

                                                                   Quantity Surveyor Report, prepared by Linesight, dated
                                                                   27/6/2025
                                                                   Sustainability Management Plan prepared by Aurecon, dated
                                                                   24/10/2024

                                                                   Traffic Impact Assessment prepared by Aurecon, dated
                                                                   24/10/2024

                                                                   Stormwater Management Plan prepared by Aurecon, dated
                                                                   2/4/2026

                                                                   Urban Context and Architectural Design Report prepared by
                                                                   Woods Bagot, dated 24/10/2025

                                                                   Waste Management Plan prepared by Aurecon, dated
                                                                   24/10/2024


2. The subject of this report is the decision plans (as described above).




                                                           PA2504032 – 1 Oroya Drive and 435 Mount Atkinson Road, Truganina   Page 3

                                                       OFFICIAL
Proposal Summary




Figure 1: Site plan (Source: Application)

3. Specific details of the application include:

         •    The use and development of the site for a data centre with ancillary offices, the display of directional signage
              and car parking. Ancillary works to support the development include a guard house, water tanks and plant
              enclosures.

         •    The data centre will have a total gross floor area of 43,356 sqm and a maximum building height of 34m
              (equivalent to 8 storeys). The building will be setback 28.1m from the frontage to Riding Boundary Road and
              27.9m to the east boundary.

         •    The building will feature a range of external materials including precast concrete panels in natural and brown
              finishes, with textured finishes to the office elevations. Generator flue stacks, which form a dominant part of
              the built form on the east and west elevations, will be finished in white steel sheet cladding. Rooftop plant will
              be screened by light grey profiled steel cladding.

         •    The data centre will operate 24 hours a day, 7 days a week with approximately 48 staff members and 12 off-
              peak skeleton staff to maintain security and operations.

         •    Each building will be accessible by internal two-way access roads and serviced by attendant car parks with a
              total of 58 car parking spaces (for staff and visitors), bike spaces and loading facilities.

         •    Landscaped setbacks will be provided along both site frontages incorporating low groundcovers through to
              canopy tree plantings. Throughout the site the development will feature a mix of low-level landscaping,
              shade-trees and large trees around the car parking areas and accessways.




                                                              PA2504032 – 1 Oroya Drive and 435 Mount Atkinson Road, Truganina   Page 4

                                                           OFFICIAL
         •   A 3m high palisade-style natural galvanised security fence around the perimeter of the site. Lighting will also
             be featured around the site.

         •   Two direction signs to guide traffic flow through the site are located at the entry points to the site.

4. The indicative footprint of a future substation is shown in the southeast corner of the site, but does not form part of
   the subject application. Backup power will be provided by diesel electrical generators located within the external plant
   area.

5. The data centre is also proposed to be connected to temporary drainage assets, which have been approved under
   the preceding subdivision permit PA2022/7987/1, which also does not form part of the subject application.

6. Stormwater for the proposal is proposed to be managed through swale drains along the proposed internal
   accessways and carparking areas, which will be directed to a future retarding basin/wetland to be constructed
   adjacent to the southeast corner of the data centre site.

7. The applicant has provided the following concept images of the proposal:




Figure 2: 3D image – Southwest perspective (Source: Application)




                                                               PA2504032 – 1 Oroya Drive and 435 Mount Atkinson Road, Truganina   Page 5

                                                            OFFICIAL
Figure 3: 3D Render image – Eastern façade (Source: Application)




Figure 4: 3D Render image – Southeastern façade (Source: Application)




Figure 5: 3D Render image – Northeast façade (Source: Application)




                                                               PA2504032 – 1 Oroya Drive and 435 Mount Atkinson Road, Truganina   Page 6

                                                           OFFICIAL
Figure 6: 3D Render image – Northwest façade (Source: Application)




                                                               PA2504032 – 1 Oroya Drive and 435 Mount Atkinson Road, Truganina   Page 7

                                                           OFFICIAL
Subject Site and Surrounds

Site Description




              Figure 7: Image showing data centre site (in grey) and drainage reserve (in pink) (Source: Application)

8. The site is located on the southeast corner of Riding Boundary Road and Oroya Drive, in the Truganina urban growth
   area.

9. The existing site is vacant, generally flat and clear of any vegetation. No formal vehicle access is currently provided
   to the site. Upon completion of the proposed development, access to the site will be via new internal accessways to
   Oroya Drive, at the centre and south side of the western site frontage.

10. The site has a rectangular shape and has frontages of approximately 529.4m to Riding Boundary Road and 380m to
    Oroya Drive, with a total size of 20.7 hectares.

11. The site is formally described as comprising the following land parcels:

        •   Lot 3 on Plan of Subdivision 907826R Volume 12633 Folio 369 and Volume 12633 Folio 397

12. The land is affected by a 3m wide sewerage easement (E-4), shown in Figure 1 below, which extends along the
    western half of the southern boundary of the site.

13. A Section 173 agreement applies to the site, although is not shown registered on title. The s173 agreement was
    required to be entered into by conditions 80 and 81 of planning permit PA2022/7987/1 for a multi lot subdivision,
    subdivision of land within a public acquisition overlay, creation of a road reserve and works within a heritage overlay
    in accordance with the endorsed plans, issued by the council 19 June 2024. Following this subdivision approval, the
    title for the subject site has been issued.

14. The Section 173 agreement provides that prior to the commencement of the development of the site, either
    temporary or ultimate drainage infrastructure must be completed, or an ‘alternative mechanism’ to the satisfaction of
    the council and Melbourne Water.

15. The application was amended 26 March 2026 to include the adjoining drainage reserve at 435 Mount Atkinson Road
    (Reserve 2 PS907826R), as a condition of any permit issued will require the construction of the drainage on the



                                                               PA2504032 – 1 Oroya Drive and 435 Mount Atkinson Road, Truganina   Page 8

                                                            OFFICIAL
    reserve land prior to the commencement of construction of the data centre, in accordance with the Section 173
    Agreement.

Site Surrounds




                Figure 8: Aerial image showing data centre site (outlined in red) and surrounds (Source: Application)

16. The surrounding land is generally cleared agricultural land earmarked for urban development to be in accordance
    with precinct structure plans (PSP) and employment areas, with development having already commenced on some
    parcels.

17. Development surrounding the site can be described as follows:

     •    North: Riding Boundary Road runs directly along the northern boundary. North of the land is zoned Urban
          Growth Zone – Schedule 9 (UGZ9) with an applied Industrial 1 Zone, consistent with the subject site. North
          east of the site is also zoned UGZ9 with an applied General Residential Zone and is being developed for
          housing.

     •    South: To the south of the site is an electricity transmission easement which includes transmission lines and
          towers. Further south is land designated as ‘Conservation area’ containing native vegetation that must
          be retained under the PSP.

     •    West: To the west of the site is Oroya Drive and industrial land comprising of large-format warehouse
          buildings. Further west are established rural residential dwellings, separated by Troups Road South.

East: East of the site is the future Mt Atkinson Road, currently a dirt track, which will become a four-lane arterial road. An
existing dry stone wall protected by Heritage Overlay HO203 lies along this route. Further east are vacant lots and
developed industrial sites, including the DHL Supply Chain Warehouse and New Aim Pry Ltd Distribution Centre at the
intersection of Riding Boundary Road and Melbourne Drive.




                                                                PA2504032 – 1 Oroya Drive and 435 Mount Atkinson Road, Truganina   Page 9

                                                             OFFICIAL
Planning Provisions

Municipal Planning Strategy
18. The MPS and PPF encourage appropriate land use and development which enhances the built environment, supports
    economic growth, meets the community expectations on retail and commercial provision, delivers diversity in housing
    supply to meet existing and future needs, and integrates transport and infrastructure planning.

19. The following objectives and strategies of the Municipal Strategic Statement of the scheme are relevant to the
    proposal:

      Clause       Description

      02.03-1      Settlement

      02.03-3      Environmental Risks and Amenity

      02-03-7      Economic Development


Planning Policy Framework
20. The following objectives and strategies of the Planning Policy Framework of the scheme are relevant to the proposal:

      Clause 11         Settlement
      11.01-1R          Settlement – Metropolitan Melbourne
      11.03-2S          Growth Areas
      Clause 13         Environmental Risks and Amenity
      13.01-3S          Urban Heat
      13.02-1S          Bushfire Planning
      13.02-1L          Bushfire Planning
      13.05-1S          Noise Management
      13.07-1S          Land Use Compatibility
      Clause 15         Built Environment and Heritage
      15.01-1S          Urban Design
      15.01-1L-01       Industrial Urban Design
      15.01-1L-04       Signs
      15.01-2S          Building Design
      15.01-2L-03       Landscaping and Green Space
      Clause 17         Economic Development
      17.01-1S          Diversified Economy – Metropolitan Melbourne
      17.01-2S &
                        Innovation and research
      17.01-1L
      Clause 18         Transport
      18.01-1S          Land use and transport integration
      18.03-3S          Sustainable Personal Transport
      Clause 19         Infrastructure
      19.03-1S          Development and Infrastructure Contributions Plans
      19.03-3S &
                        Integrated Water Management
      19.03-3L




                                                               PA2504032 – 1 Oroya Drive and 435 Mount Atkinson Road, Truganina   Page 10

                                                             OFFICIAL
21. The assessment section of this report provides a detailed assessment of the relevant planning policies

Statutory Planning Controls
Applicable Zones
22. The subject site is located within the Mount Atkinson and Tarneit Plains Precinct Structure Plan (PSP) and identified
    as ‘industrial employment’ land under the PSP.




   Figure 9: Image showing data centre site (marked with red X) in the Mount Atkinson and Tarneit Plains Precinct Structure Plan

23. The PSP also shows open space drainage generally to the south-east of the site, extending in a linear corridor to
    Riding Boundary Road.

24. A planning permit is required to use land for a data centre and to construct a building or construct or carry out works
    in accordance with Clause 37.07-9 and 37.07-11 of the UGZ9 and Clause 33.01-1 and Clause 33.01-4 of the INZ1,
    respectively.

25. The purpose of the UGZ is:

     •   To implement the Municipal Planning Strategy and the Planning Policy Framework.

     •   To manage the transition of non-urban land into urban land in accordance with a precinct structure plan.

     •   To provide for a range of uses and the development of land generally in accordance with a precinct structure
         plan.

     •   To contain urban use and development to areas identified for urban development in a precinct structure plan.

     •   To provide for the continued non-urban use of the land until urban development in accordance with a precinct
         structure plan occurs.

     •   To ensure that, before a precinct structure plan is applied, the use and development of land does not prejudice
         the future urban use and development of the land.



                                                                PA2504032 – 1 Oroya Drive and 435 Mount Atkinson Road, Truganina   Page 11

                                                            OFFICIAL
26. The proposal is consistent with the specific provisions of Schedule 9 to the UGZ as follows:

     •   The site is not located in quarry blast, high pressure gas transmission pipeline and railway noise attenuation
         buffers, which are further east of Mt Atkinson Road (noting the subject site is on the west side).

     •   The site is also not within an area where an Urban Design Framework is required to be prepared prior to the
         issue of a permit.

     •   The site is more than 50m away from a conservation area and therefore a construction environmental
         management plan is not required.

     •   A condition is required on the permit for a salvage inquiry form to DEECA.

27. The purpose of the INZ1 is:

     •   To implement the Municipal Planning Strategy and the Planning Policy Framework.

     •   To provide for manufacturing industry, the storage and distribution of goods and associated facilities in a
         manner which does not affect the safety and amenity of local communities.

28. The assessment section includes a discussion of how the proposal responds to these requirements.

29. A mandatory requirement for data centres is “Any gas holder, or sewerage or refuse treatment or disposal works,
    must be at least 30 metres from land (not a road) which is in an Activity Centre Zone, Capital City Zone, Commercial
    1 Zone, Docklands Zone, residential zone or Rural Living Zone, land used for a hospital, an education centre or a
    corrective institution or land in a Public Acquisition Overlay to be acquired for a hospital, an education centre or a
    corrective institution.”

30. The site will be located more than 30m from the closest residential land, which is further to the northeast, and
    therefore will meet this requirement.

Applicable Overlay
31. The subject site is affected by the Infrastructure Contributions Overlay – Schedule 3 (ICO3).

32. The purpose of the ICO is:

     •   To implement the Municipal Planning Strategy and the Planning Policy Framework.

     •   To identify the area where an infrastructure contributions plan applies for the purpose of imposing contributions
         for the provision of infrastructure.

     •   To identify the infrastructure contribution imposed for the development of land.

33. A permit granted must:

     •   Be consistent with the provisions of the relevant infrastructure contributions plan.

     •   Include any conditions required to give effect to any levies set out in the relevant schedule to this overlay.

34. Council advised infrastructure levies were paid during the previous subdivision process and are not required to be
    paid for the proposed development.

Particular Provisions
Provisions that Require, Enable or Exempt a permit
35. Clause 52.05 sets out the requirements for signage. Industrial land in the UGZ9/IN1Z is a Category 2 area under
    Clause 52.05-12. A permit is required for the display of more than one directional sign per premises.




                                                             PA2504032 – 1 Oroya Drive and 435 Mount Atkinson Road, Truganina   Page 12

                                                         OFFICIAL
36. Clause 52.06 sets out the requirements of car parking provision and design. Clause 52.06-5 (Table 1 - Car parking
    requirement) does not include the land use ‘data centre’ and as such, pursuant to Clause 52.06-6, car parking
    spaces must be provided to the satisfaction of the responsible authority.

37. 52.29 (Land adjacent to the Principal Road Network) does not apply to the proposal, given it does not include access
    to the principal road network – i.e. Riding Boundary Road or Mount Atkinson Road. The application was, however,
    referred to DTP Transport during the preapplication process and no concerns were raised or permit conditions
    recommended.

38. Clause 52.34 sets out the requirements for bicycle facilities. The clause does not include any requirements for ‘data
    centre.’

General Requirements and Performance Standards
39. Clause 53.10 applies to uses with adverse amenity potential. The proposal includes the storage of diesel in
    quantities of approximately 1,152 tonnes, which is less than the threshold limit set out in the Table to Clause 53.10-2
    (2000 tonnes). Accordingly, there is no referral required under Clause 53.10-1 to the Environment Protection
    Authority.

40. Clause 53.18 applies to the buildings and works of this application. The clause includes standards and objectives
    relating to stormwater management.

41. Clause 53.22 Significant Economic Development seeks to:

     •   To prioritise and facilitate the planning, assessment and delivery of projects that will make a significant
         contribution to Victoria’s economy and provide substantial public benefit, including jobs for Victorians.

     •   To provide for the efficient and effective use of land and facilitate use and development with high quality urban
         design, architecture and landscape architecture.

42. The proposal is submitted under Category 1, having met the relevant conditions and eligibility criteria of this Clause.

Other Strategic Considerations
Plan for Victoria
43. Plan for Victoria provides a long-term strategic framework to guide sustainable growth, economic development, and
    infrastructure delivery across the state. The proposed industrial facility at 1 Oroya Drive, Truganina aligns with the
    objectives of Plan for Victoria by supporting industry, job creation, and the development of state-significant
    employment precincts. The plan emphasises the importance of clustering industries and delivering infrastructure that
    underpins Victoria’s economic competitiveness and resilience.

44. Plan for Victoria outlines the key strategic directions with regard to the provision of housing and commercial activity
    within Victoria. Pillar 2 of the Plan is ’Accessible jobs and services’, of which a key direction is the delivery of more jobs
    near homes by planning for, protecting and readying commercial and industrial land for development in locations well-
    serviced with jobs, shops, public transport and community facilities and services

45. Pillar 3 of the Plan is ‘Great places, suburbs and towns’ which includes a direction for more canopy trees in urban
    areas, which is featured in Action 12 of the plan ‘Protect and enhance our canopy trees’. This action includes
    consideration of canopy tree planting in industrial developments.

46. Action 5 of the Plan is ‘Match car and bicycle parking requirements and bike facilities with demand’, which aims to
    reduce the number of carparking spaces required for development in locations well serviced by public transport.




                                                               PA2504032 – 1 Oroya Drive and 435 Mount Atkinson Road, Truganina   Page 13

                                                           OFFICIAL
Mount Atkinson and Tarneit Plains Precinct Structure Plan
47. The subject site is located within the Mount Atkinson and Tarneit Plains PSP, which is bound by the Western
    Freeway to the north, Hopkins Road to the east, Middle Road to the south and Outer Metropolitan Ring (OMR)
    reservation to the west. The PSP sets out a vision for the future urban structure as a vital employment hub within the
    West Growth Corridor.

48. The subject site has been categorised as ‘industrial employment’ land and the PSP specifies requirements and
    guidelines that apply to the area to support employment growth in the area, as well as attractive interfaces to enable
    positive addresses to the street.




                                                           PA2504032 – 1 Oroya Drive and 435 Mount Atkinson Road, Truganina   Page 14

                                                        OFFICIAL
Referrals and Notice

Referrals
49. The application was referred to the following groups:

        Provision / Clause      Organisation                 Response and date received

        Section 55 Referral –   WorkSafe Victoria            No objection – subject to conditions on 3/12/2025
        Determining

        Section 55 Referral –   AusNet Transmission Group    No objection 4/12/2025
        Determining
        Section 52              Melton City Council          No objection 22/12/2025 – refer to discussion below.

        Informal                Fire Rescue Victoria         No response

        Informal                Melbourne Water              No objection – subject to condition on 22/12/2025

        Informal                Greater Western Water        No objection – subject to conditions on 1/12/2025



Site drainage – Melbourne Water and Council

50. As noted earlier in the report, a Section 173 agreement provides that drainage infrastructure must be completed prior
    to the commencement of development on the site, to the satisfaction of the council and Melbourne Water. The
    applicant had asserted the drainage works were complete, however, both Melbourne Water and Council advised
    they had not approved the drainage infrastructure in their referral responses.

51. Melbourne Water advised they had agreed to, though not approved, a temporary drainage basin and sediment basin
    with free draining gravity outfall being constructed within the reserve adjacent to the site. This was to be in
    accordance with a Stormwater Management Strategy (SWMS) prepared by Spiire, dated September 2025. The
    agreement was between Melbourne Water and the subdivision developer.

52. Melbourne Water recommended a condition be placed on the permit requiring the drainage infrastructure in
    accordance with the Spiire SWMS to be completed prior to the commencement of works.

53. Council advised it also supported, but had not approved, the temporary drainage infrastructure.

54. The applicant raised concerns with the approach, arguing it understood the drainage works had been completed.

55. Meetings were held with the applicant, Melbourne Water and council on 10 and 24 February 2026. It became
    apparent in the discussion that:

    •     While there had been preliminary discussions between the subdivision developer, Melbourne Water and council,
          no formal plans had been submitted or approved.

    •     Despite not being approved, the construction of the drainage had commenced, but its status was unclear. In a
          subsequent email to DTP dated 2 March 2026, Council advised the drainage works had occurred without
          approved documentation or plans and therefore are unauthorised and incomplete and have not satisfied the
          obligations under the Section 173 Agreement.

56. Council further advised in the 2 March 2026 email that to satisfy the obligations of the Section 173 Agreement, the
    subdivision developer will need to complete the following:

    •     The Functional Design for the ultimate wetland is to be approved by Melbourne Water.

    •     The Spiire interim Stormwater Management Plan must formally be approved by Council (with requested
          changes) and the memo must be in accordance with the approved Functional Design.




                                                            PA2504032 – 1 Oroya Drive and 435 Mount Atkinson Road, Truganina   Page 15

                                                        OFFICIAL
     •    Engineering Plans in accordance with the approved strategy/memo must be submitted to both Council and
          Melbourne Water and must be approved.

     •    Works must be completed as per the approved plans and as constructed surveyed plans must be submitted.

57. As discussed later in the Assessment section of this report, the temporary drainage and sediment basin will be
    constructed in the same location as the future ultimate wetland.

58. Council also recommended any permit include the following condition:

    Prior to commencement of building and hardstand works, a temporary drainage solution approved under
    PA2022/7987 must be fully constructed to the satisfaction of Melton City Council and Melbourne Water.

59. Council agreed to follow up the matter with the subdivision developer and advised DTP in an email on 6 March 2026
    the parties had met and minor revisions to the SWMS would be required.

60. Given progress is being made toward approval and construction of the subdivision drainage, it is considered the
    proposal can proceed subject to a condition as recommended by Melbourne Water and council that the drainage be
    approved and completed to their satisfaction prior to the occupation of the proposed development.

61. The Spiire SWMS for the proposed data centre will need to be updated to address the delivery of the temporary
    subdivision drainage infrastructure, as recommended by council.

62. The application was amended under s50 to include the adjacent drainage land (the reserve), to ensure the condition
    relates to the land which forms the subject site and the required drainage obligations, on any permit issued.

Municipal Council Comments

63. In addition to the drainage concerns, council provided the following comments in the table below:

Melton City Council comment                                                                            Recommendation

Response to Key Corner (Mt Atkinson and Riding Boundary Road): In accordance with the                  Changes to the materials on the
Mt Atkinson & Tarneit Plains PSP (Requirement 33), the proposed development is located at              northeast corner of the main data
a key corner (Mt Atkinson and Riding Boundary Road) where its built form must incorporate              hall part of the building will be
features of interest. Currently, the development proposes the loading dock at this corner              required as a condition of permit, as
resulting in no significant activation, blank walls that do not appropriately respond to the site’s    discussed in the Assessment
strategic location, nor promote features of interest. This does not align with the relevant PSP        section of this report.
requirements and Clause 15.01-1L-02 Industrial Urban Design of the Melton Planning
Scheme, which discourages blank interfaces on buildings that address the public realm and
require feature treatments at the corner.
Built Form and Facade Articulation: The proposed built form response does not align with               Built form is assessed in the
Clause 15.01-1L-02 Industrial Urban Design – Building Design Strategies of the Melton                  Assessment section of this report.
Planning Scheme and Requirement 33 of the PSP, which require built form articulation and
visual interest. Additionally, as per the Melton City Council’s Industrial Design Guidelines,
requirement B31 requires incorporating feature cladding, facade delineation and greater
colour variation to reduce the proposal’s visual bulkiness, particularly at street corners.

DTP Urban Design

64. DTP Urban Design reviewed the proposal during the preapplication process, who commended the design for its
    thoughtful response to the context. They highlighted the successful articulation of building massing, effective
    integration of mixed uses, and the inclusion of high-quality landscaping.

65. In addition, the following comments were provided:

DTP Urban Design comment                                                                               Response/Recommendation




                                                                     PA2504032 – 1 Oroya Drive and 435 Mount Atkinson Road, Truganina   Page 16

                                                                 OFFICIAL
We acknowledge that the proposal is around 8 storeys tall. Provide precedent and                     Precedents were provided and are
benchmarking of best practice design for a data centre of this scale.                                included in the discussion in the
                                                                                                     Assessment section in this report.
Provide a visual impact assessment including images and renders from the surrounding area            A visual impact assessment was
to assist with review of massing.                                                                    provided.
We are supportive of the overall design intent of the project. However, we query whether the         Materiality is discussed later in the
massing could be further broken up through greater variation in materials. This could be             Assessment section this report.
achieved by increasing tonal or colour contrast between materials CE01, CE02 and CE03
across the office and loading building, the service core, and the data hall. We acknowledge
that tones may appear differently in documentation compared to real life and defer to the
team's discretion on final selections.
Architectural plans for the guard house have not been provided. Please include further detail        Guard house elevations are shown
for review.                                                                                          on the decision plans.
We commend the team on a well-considered landscape masterplan that thoughtfully                      Noted.
balances security requirements with a landscape-led approach. The integration of WSUD
elements across the site establishes a strong connection to the proposed Melbourne
wetlands to the south and the broader ecological network. The entrance public space to the
office is particularly well-resolved, creating a prominent feature along a key street frontage.

DTP Transport

66. As noted earlier, while they are not a referral authority under Section 55 of the Planning and Environment Act 1987
    (the Act), the application was referred for comment to DTP Transport during the preapplication process. Transport
    advised it had no objection to the proposal and requested the plans clearly show the Public Acquisition Overlay
    boundary. The overlay does not affect the site and no works are proposed in it and therefore it is considered this is
    not required to be shown.




              Figure 10: Plan showing Public Acquisition Overlay (PAO3) abutting the north boundary of the subject site.

Notice

67. As noted earlier, with the exception of the directional signage, the proposal is exempt from the notice requirements of
    section 52(1)(a), (b) and (d), the decision requirements of section 64(1), (2) and (3) and the review rights of section
    82(1) of the Act.




                                                                   PA2504032 – 1 Oroya Drive and 435 Mount Atkinson Road, Truganina   Page 17

                                                               OFFICIAL
68. Notice was given to Council under Section 52, but was not given to any other persons as it was determined the signs
    would not result in material detriment to any person.




                                                          PA2504032 – 1 Oroya Drive and 435 Mount Atkinson Road, Truganina   Page 18

                                                      OFFICIAL
Assessment

Strategic Direction and Land Use
69. The proposal is considered to provide an appropriate response to the above-mentioned planning policies as outlined
    below:

      •   The proposal supports the ongoing growth of the Mount Atkinson and Tarneit Plains Precinct by providing local
          employment opportunities close to where people live (Clause 11.03-2S, 17.01-1S). It will facilitate growth in the
          technology sector and will also be important infrastructure required for business, education, research and
          innovation (Clause 17.01-2S and 17.01-1L).

      •   The site will have access to sustainable modes of transport, with future bus routes along both Riding Boundary
          Road and Mt Atkinson Road planned under the PSP. Shared paths are also planned along both roads, and
          Oroya Drive will also provide bicycle access (Clause 18.01-1S). Bicycle facilities have been included for the
          proposal (Clause 18.01-3S).

      •   The proposal is also considered a satisfactory built form and landscaping outcome and responds to
          sustainability objectives, as further discussed later in this report.

70. The proposed land use is also considered a satisfactory response to the decision guidelines of the Industrial 1 Zone,
    as follows:

  •       The application was referred to Worksafe as it requires consent under the Dangerous Goods Act 1985.
  •       Noise emissions are addressed in the following assessment.
  •       The traffic generated by the proposal will have a satisfactory level of access to the metropolitan road network.
71. The purpose of the zoning has been also considered, and it is noted that site is located within an industrial precinct,
    which provides for uses ‘associated’ with manufacturing and storage, of which the proposal is considered to be given
    it is infrastructure that supports digital technology, which is used by industry.

72. The data centre will aid in the creation of more than 48 permanent operational employment positions and a
    substantial number of construction jobs as well as providing valuable connective infrastructure to support regional
    industry and commerce.

Noise

73. The Environmental Noise Assessment assessed noise impacts from the proposal on the nearest existing and future
    sensitive receptors, located between approximately 215m and 1km of the site, as shown in the image below.




                      Figure 11: Plan showing nearest sensitive receivers (teal circles) (Source: Application)



                                                                PA2504032 – 1 Oroya Drive and 435 Mount Atkinson Road, Truganina   Page 19

                                                            OFFICIAL
74. The report identified noise potential from plant including chillers, outdoor air processing units, generators, as well as
    an electrical substation to be delivered by Ausnet. Not all information was available for the proposed equipment and
    accordingly the report recommended ongoing review of equipment selections to be undertaken as the design
    progresses, to review the need for any adjustments in accordance with the Noise Protocol methodologies. Based on
    the information available, the report predicted the substation is unlikely to be audible from the sensitive receptors and
    that the proposed rooftop barrier would comply with noise limits for the other noise-generating equipment. Conditions
    of permit will require the recommendations of the acoustic report be carried out (Clause 13.05-1S).

75. The report also found that testing for the generators would comply with daytime limits. Accordingly a condition of
    permit will require generator testing be limited to daytime hours only.

Land use compatibility

76. It is considered the proposal has demonstrated compatibility with land uses in the area, as it is located in a planned,
    emerging industrial area (Clause 13.07-1S). A data centre is not a use listed under Clause 53.10. It will involve
    storage of 1,152,000 litres (1,152 tonnes) of diesel fuel onsite for the generators, but this is below 2,000 tonnes and
    therefore a buffer to sensitive uses is not required under Clause 53.10.

77. Referral to Worksafe was required under Clause 66.02-7 (Industry, utility installation or warehouse) as the materials
    kept/used onsite will exceed the thresholds including for batteries and diesel under the Dangerous Goods (Storage
    and Handling) Regulations 2022. As noted earlier, Worksafe have not objected to the proposal and a condition will
    be placed on the permit requiring the preparation of an Emergency Management Plan, which will be provided to Fire
    Rescue Victoria.

78. The Contaminated Land Report also found there was a low risk of site contamination from its former agricultural land
    use and that a Preliminary Risk Screening Assessment would not be required.

Buildings and Works
79. In considering the design and built form of the proposed development, the most relevant clauses of the Melton Planning
    Scheme are Clause 15.01-1S (Urban Design), 15.01-1L-01 (Industrial Urban Design) and 15.01-2S (Building Design).
    These policies and controls seek to ensure new development achieves high standards of architectural quality and
    amenity, and responds to its context.

80. The following assessment considers the building design response in terms of setbacks, height, massing and
    architectural detail. It is considered the proposal will be a satisfactory response for the industrial nature of the site and
    area, subject to a change in materiality to the northeast corner of the ‘data hall’ part of the building. The design of the
    development is contemporary and functional, with a focus on durability and security.

Setbacks

81. The proposed development provides generous setbacks to all boundaries of the data centre site, with a substantial
    front setback to Riding Boundary Road. The office component of the building will be located on the north elevation,
    which is a lower part of the building. The main taller built form will be setback 52.2m from the Riding Boundary Road
    frontage.

82. The drainage reserve will front Mt Atkinson Road and therefore the proposal will be significantly setback from this
    interface.

83. The proposed data centre will also be setback from the west and south boundaries, with carparking areas, accessways
    and smaller scale ancillary buildings, including the guard house and water tanks within the setback.

84. All setbacks substantially exceed the minimum requirement of 5m, and will include landscaping as shown in the
    concept landscape plan, including substantial tree planting. It is considered the setbacks and landscaping will provide
    an attractive interface with Riding Boundary Road, as well as Mt Atkinson Road beyond the drainage reserve.




                                                              PA2504032 – 1 Oroya Drive and 435 Mount Atkinson Road, Truganina   Page 20

                                                          OFFICIAL
       Figure 12 – Landscape plan showing planting areas in green in setbacks and throughout the site (Source: Application)

85. It is acknowledged a substation is planned in the southeast corner of the site. It is not part of this application and
    therefore cannot be considered. It will, however, also be set behind the drainage reserve and landscaping is also
    proposed in its eastern setback.

Building height and massing

86. The proposed data centre has three main sections – the data hall building, flues and office component, as shown in
    the image below.




                               Figure 13 – Sketch of data centre components (Source: Application)




                                                               PA2504032 – 1 Oroya Drive and 435 Mount Atkinson Road, Truganina   Page 21

                                                           OFFICIAL
87. As shown in the image above, there is variance in the heights and massing at different parts of the building, particularly
    viewed from Riding Boundary Road.

88. The proposed main ‘data hall’ building will have a height of 34m. While this is significant and taller than buildings that
    are generally located in industrial areas, it is not considered a poor outcome, particularly given the site does not have
    sensitive interfaces, such as with a residential area, where adverse amenity impacts would require consideration.
    There are also no significant viewlines identified in the planning scheme that the proposed buildings would impact.
    Buildings of scale are also the dominant, albeit lower, built form in growth area industrial areas, as shown in the images
    below. The proposal, while different, will still form part of and not be inconsistent with the emerging large-format
    industrial character of the area.




      Figures 14 and 15 (left to right): Views from the site toward Riding Boundary Road and Oroya Drive (Source: Application)

89. It is further noted the overhead transmission lines to the south of the site will also provide a vertical built form in the
    landscape.




                       Figure 16 – Transmission lines south of the site within easement (Source: Application)

90. There are no height controls for industrial developments within the UGZ9 or IN1Z. A policy guideline for building height
    in Clause 15.01-1L-02 is to consider, as relevant, whether there should be a maximum height of 9m, or 7m for office
    components. It is noted the provision applies to both existing and growth area industrial zones. It is considered the




                                                                PA2504032 – 1 Oroya Drive and 435 Mount Atkinson Road, Truganina   Page 22

                                                            OFFICIAL
    guideline has limited relevance to the context of the site, given there is no existing character and the emerging character
    discussed earlier.

91. The 3 storey office component will be sited on the north side of the building and will provide some articulation to this
    elevation, with a recessed upper level (Level 2), as shown in the image below.




                 Figure 17 - Concept render of building, viewed from Riding Boundary Road (Source: Application)

92. The massing of the building will be substantial and is required for its function. Floor to ceiling heights of 7m are required
    to accommodate the operation and servicing of internal infrastructure and equipment. Two rows of diesel backup
    generators are required and are located on the east and west sides of the building. Flue stacks for the generators are
    the same height as the data centre, which is required to release emissions at an elevated height. Air chillers will be
    located on the rooftop, behind a 6m high screen. The chillers will reduce water usage for cooling.

93. Examples of other data centres of similar height and scale to the proposal in NSW have been included in the applicant’s
    planning report.

94. The data centre will also have no windows by necessity. The office component, however, will have windows facing
    Riding Boundary Road.

Design detail

95. The flue stacks, which will form the main view of the data centre from Mt Atkinson Road, will feature a sculpted angular
    design which will create visual interest.




                                                              PA2504032 – 1 Oroya Drive and 435 Mount Atkinson Road, Truganina   Page 23

                                                          OFFICIAL
    Figures 18 and 19 (left to right): Concept renders of proposed flue stacks, viewed side-on and from Mt Atkinson Road (Source:
                                                               Application)

96. The north elevation of the data hall, however, will not be obscured by the flue stacks and will be only partly obscured
    by the office component of the building. This part of the façade, as shown on the left side of Figure 17 earlier, will
    consist of a sheer wall approximately 25m high and consist solely of vertical precast concrete panels.

97. Given the site fronts Riding Boundary Road, close to the intersection with Mt Atkinson Road, the site is a key location,
    as defined in requirement 33 of the PSP. This use of solely precast concrete panels is considered an unsatisfactory
    response to this requirement, which provides that built form in these locations ‘incorporate features of interest,’
    including articulation of building facades, feature colours and materials

98. It is also considered this part of the façade is an unsatisfactory response to Clause 15.01-1L-02, which includes a
    strategy to avoid blank interfaces on buildings that address the public realm.

99. A condition will therefore be required on the permit that the northeast corner of the data hall part of the building be
    broken up through a greater variation in materials, as recommended by DTP Urban Design. It is considered this would
    avoid the visual bulk currently proposed and provide more visual interest.

100. It is acknowledged the south elevation will also feature similar high, sheer walls of precast concrete panelling. This is
     however a less sensitive interface, given it faces internally and not the public realm. It will also be setback further from
     Mount Atkinson Road. Therefore it is considered no further changes to materiality are required.

Landscaping
101. The proposed landscaping responds to 15.01-1L-01 by providing landscaping in the front setback to Riding Boundary
     Road, on both sides of the internal accessway, with a total depth of 20.3m. This exceeds the minimum policy
     requirement of 5m.

102. The landscaping along the east boundary also responds to the policy, by providing minimum landscaping strips of 3.7
     – 17.3m width. The minimum policy requirement for this boundary is 2m, as it shares a boundary with a waterway.

103. A condition of permit will require detailed landscape plans, showing at least 5% canopy coverage. Subject to this
     requirement it is considered the landscape planting will be a satisfactory response to Clauses 13.01-3S (Urban heat)
     and 15.01-1L-03 (Landscaping and green space).

104. 2.7m high security fencing will be located on the north boundary and partially on all other boundaries and internally
     around the proposed data centre and ancillary buildings, internal accessways and carparking areas. The fencing will
     be of an open style, allowing for views into the site. It is considered the fencing is appropriate for the security needs of
     the facility, which requires a clear zone around the fence of 2.7m, and is a satisfactory response to Clause 15.01-1L-
     01, noting it avoids razor or barbed wire and landscaping will be visible through the fence.

Car Parking, Bicycles Storage and Other Services

Car Parking

105. As noted earlier, car parking spaces must be provided to the satisfaction of the responsible authority. 48 staff members
     are proposed with 58 car parking spaces provided.

106. The anticipated car parking demand is therefore comfortably met by the proposal, as such the proposal provides a
     satisfactory number of car parking spaces.

Design Standards for Car Parking

107. The proposal includes a Transport Impact Assessment Report (TIAR) which outlines that all relevant design standards
     for car parking as outlined in Clause 52.06-9 have been met, including:

     •    Internal accessway widths and sight distances.



                                                                PA2504032 – 1 Oroya Drive and 435 Mount Atkinson Road, Truganina   Page 24

                                                             OFFICIAL
     •   Carparking spaces and aisle dimensions.

     •   Queuing area at the data centre boom gate entrance.

108. The proposed number (one) and location of accessible spaces has been assessed as compliant with AS 2890.1.

Access, Traffic Movements and Circulation

109. Main vehicle site access will be via a 21.6m wide vehicle crossing to Oroya Drive, with a split two-way accessway
     leading to a central roundabout. It is acknowledged the vehicle crossing is wide, but is required to facilitate turning
     manoeuvres into and out of the site to Oroya Drive, as shown in swept path diagrams in the TIAR.

110. From the roundabout an accessway will continue to the data centre gates and carparking area. Another accessway
     will lead south to a proposed plant enclosure and the future substation, continuing along the south boundary to a
     secondary access to Oroya Drive.

111. Vehicle traffic is expected to be 150 movements per day, including employees and visitors, as well as deliveries during
     normal business hours. This volume can be accommodated by the internal and surrounding road network.

112. A pedestrian connection will also be provided to Riding Boundary Road, providing direct access to site.

113. It is considered the proposed access arrangements are a satisfactory response to Clause 52.06-9.

Bicycles Facilities

114. Clause 52.34-1 of the planning scheme does not require bicycle parking for data centres (or any uses under the utility
     installation land use group) and therefore there is no bicycle parking requirement.

115. Notwithstanding the above, the proposal provides 16 bicycle spaces and end of trip facilities.

Loading / Unloading and Waste

116. Off-street loading is provided via a dedicated internal area within the north part of the building, designed to
     accommodate semi trailer vehicles. Swept path analysis confirms that heavy vehicles can enter, circulate, and exit the
     site in a forward direction. The proposed loading arrangements are considered satisfactory.

117. The waste management plan includes a recommendation for a 34sqm waste storage room, which a condition of permit
     will require to be shown on the plans. Waste is proposed to be collected by a private contractor on a weekly basis.

Environmental Risks

Bushfire Risk

118. The subject site is located within a Bushfire Prone Area. Minimum construction standards to prevent bushfire risk within
     Bushfire Prone Areas only apply to sensitive developments for example schools, childcare facilities, aged care facilities
     and places of assembly. The proposal is not required to consider bushfire risk as the use and development is not
     sensitive.

Sustainability

Environmentally Sustainable Design (ESD)

119. The applicant has submitted a Sustainability Management Plan which commits to achieving a silver rating under the
     LEED v4.1 certification process. Initiatives to achieve the silver rating will be developed during later stages of the
     design process.

120. There is no local policy requirement for a SMP under the Melton Planning Scheme and accordingly the proposed SMP
     is considered satisfactory. Conditions of permit will require the SMP to be implemented.



                                                             PA2504032 – 1 Oroya Drive and 435 Mount Atkinson Road, Truganina   Page 25

                                                         OFFICIAL
121. Key ESD initiatives outlined in the SMP include:

    •   Energy efficiency and management, with the objective to reduce energy usage and greenhouse gas emissions
        and monitor performance to identify inefficiencies and identify opportunities for future improvements.
    •   Water efficiency and management, with specification of high efficiency fixtures and fittings, re-use of rainwater on-
        site, reduction of irrigation requirements, and an effective water metering strategy to identify any losses early and
        opportunities for future improvements.
    •   The investigation of more sustainable material choices including those with lower embodied carbon,
        Environmental Product Declarations, and transparent material sourcing evidence.
    •   Landscaping prioritising native vegetation and provision of quality green spaces, for improved amenity and
        aesthetics, including reduction of urban heating.
    •   Provision of EV-ready infrastructure to 20% of car parking.
    •   Connections to existing and planned future public transport and active transport infrastructure, and provision of
        facilities to enable active transport.
    •   Indoor environmental quality improvements including controls to prevent the entry of pollutants into the building,
        and quality ventilation to indoor polluting areas.
    •   On-site collection and separation of recyclables including batteries and e-waste.

Stormwater Management

122. Clause 53.18 (Stormwater management in urban development) applies to this application. The purpose of this
     clause is to ensure that stormwater generated by urban development is managed to mitigate environmental, property,
     and public safety impacts, and to provide benefits such as cooling, local habitat, and amenity.

123. As discussed earlier, the Stormwater Management Strategy (SWMS) will need to be updated to address the matter of
     the incomplete subdivision drainage. The SWMS prepared in support of the subject application largely relied on a
     SWMS prepared for the subdivision works by Spiire in June 2023.

124. A more recent SWMS was prepared by Spiire in September 2025, for the interim drainage works, which has yet to be
     formally approved. Melbourne Water advised in their referral comments it had accepted the September 2025 SWMS,
     although clarified later it had not been formally approved. Council advised in an email dated 6 March 2026 the SWMS
     will require some minor revisions.

125. Therefore the SWMS for the proposal will need to be updated to be in accordance with the updated SWMS, prior to
     endorsement. This will be reflected in conditions on permit.

126. The SWMS for the subject proposal outlines a strategy to meet the stormwater management and water quality
     requirements of Clause 53.18 by directing drainage offsite to be stored in a temporary retarding basin. The basin would
     also address water quality by providing a secondary function as an interim sediment pond. The ultimate stormwater
     quality asset will be wetlands, when constructed. Given council and Melbourne Water have confirmed this arrangement
     is acceptable, it is considered there is sufficient certainty to proceed to issue a permit subject to the conditions
     discussed.

Other Matters

Clause 52.05 Signs

127. Two direction signs are proposed to guide traffic flow through the site, including one located at the main entry / exit
     point to the site and the other at the internal entrance near the gates. The signs will have a display area of 0.3sqm, will
     measure 2m above ground, with a total height of 2.5m and will not be illuminated. The signs are of an appropriate
     scale and design for their purpose.




                                                              PA2504032 – 1 Oroya Drive and 435 Mount Atkinson Road, Truganina   Page 26

                                                          OFFICIAL
Clause 53.22 Significant Economic Development

128. The proposal is considered consistent with the purpose of Clause 53.22 as it is a large utility installation development
     in a significant employment precinct and will contribute to Victoria’s economy. Subject to the conditions recommended
     in this report, it is considered the proposal will result in high quality built form and a functional operation and layout.




                                                              PA2504032 – 1 Oroya Drive and 435 Mount Atkinson Road, Truganina   Page 27

                                                          OFFICIAL
