                                      D           A
                                            C

                 DEVELOPMENT CONSENT AUTHORITY


                               DARWIN DIVISION


                       PART 1 – MINUTES (ITEMS 1-6)


            MEETING NO. 436 – FRIDAY 7 FEBRUARY 2025


                                  AGORA ROOM
                                HUDSON BERRIMAH
                                4 BERRIMAH ROAD
                                    BERRIMAH


MEMBERS PRESENT: Suzanne Philip (Chair), Mark Blackburn, Monica Baumgartner, Peter
                 Pangquee and Jimmy Bouhoris


APOLOGIES:        Marion Guppy and Mick Palmer
LEAVE OF ABSENCE: None


OFFICERS PRESENT: Margaret Macintyre (Secretary), Kaleb Thomas, Madison Harvey and Lingyi
                  Kong (Development Assessment Services)


COUNCIL REPRESENTATIVE: Apology

                     Meeting opened at 10.30 am and closed at 2.45 pm
                       Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

THE MINUTES RECORD OF THE EVIDENTIARY STAGE AND THE DELIBERATIVE STAGE ARE RECORDED SEPARATELY. THESE
MINUTES RECORD THE DELIBERATIVE STAGE. THE TWO STAGES ARE GENERALLY HELD AT DIFFERENT TIME DURING THE
MEETING AND INVITEES ARE PRESENT FOR THE EVIDENTIARY STAGE ONLY.




 ITEM 1           CONCURRENT APPLICATION
 PA2024/0248      PART LOT - REZONE FROM SC (SERVICE COMMERCIAL) TO MR (MEDIUM
                  DENSITY RESIDENTIAL); AND CHILDCARE CENTRE
                  LOT 5021 (2) RAILWAY STREET, PARAP, TOWN OF DARWIN
 APPLICANT        One Planning Consult

                  Applicant: Israel-Tshepo Kgosiemang (One Planning Consult) attended.

                  Submitter: Duncan Price sent his apologies

 RESOLVED         That, the Development Consent Authority pursuant to section 30P(1)(a) of the
 05/25            Planning Act 1999 decide that, if the Minister were to approve the amendment
                  proposal to rezone part of Lot 5021 Town of Darwin (2 Railway Street, Parap),
                  that it would be likely to determine to consent to the development under section
                  30W(1)(a) conditionally for the purpose of child care centre in a single storey
                  building, subject to the following conditions:

                  CONDITION PRECEDENT

                  1.     Prior to the endorsement of plans and prior to commencement of works
                         (including site preparation), amended plans to the satisfaction of the consent
                         authority must be submitted to and approved by the consent authority.
                         When approved, the plans will be endorsed and will then form part of the
                         permit. The plans must be drawn to scale with dimensions and must be
                         generally in accordance with the plans submitted with the application but
                         modified to show:
                         a.    A minimum 2 metre setback from the Stuart Highway lot boundary to
                               the car parking area, to achieve better compliance with sub-clause 6(a)
                               of clause 5.2.4.4 (Layout of car parking areas) of the Northern
                               Territory Planning Scheme 2020.
                         b.    Show location, height and design of fencing along the Stuart Highway
                               frontage, in accordance with the Transport and Civil Services Division
                               (TCSD) of the Department of Logistics and Infrastructure (DLI)
                               standards and requirements, to deter unauthorised vehicular and/or
                               pedestrian movement. Any gates provided are to be fixed to open
                               inwards only.

                  2.     Prior to the endorsement of plans and commencement of works (including
                         site preparation), a landscape plan to the satisfaction of the consent
                         authority must be submitted to and approved by the consent authority.
                         When approved, the plan will be endorsed and will then form part of the
                         permit. The plan must be drawn to scale with dimensions, and be generally
                         in accordance with the site plan dated July 2024 prepared by Insite
                         Architects, except that the plan must:
                         a.    A survey (including botanical names) of all existing vegetation to be
                               retained and/or removed;


                                                         Page 2 of 50

                        These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                                     Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
                        Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
     Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

       b.    Details of surface finishes of pathways and driveways;
       c.    A planting schedule of all proposed trees, shrubs and ground covers,
             including botanical names, common names, pot sizes, sizes at maturity,
             and quantities of each plant;
       d.    Landscaping and planting within all open areas of the site;
       e.    Four canopy trees (minimum 2 metres tall when planted) in the setback
             to Railway Street; and
       f.    Provision of an in-ground irrigation system to all landscaped areas
             (including as a ‘general note’).
       All species selected must be to the satisfaction of the consent authority.

3.     Prior to the endorsement of plans and prior to the commencement of works
       (including site preparation), a schematic plan demonstrating the on-site
       collection of stormwater and its discharge into the City of Darwin
       stormwater drainage system must be submitted to and approved by the City
       of Darwin, to the satisfaction of the consent authority. The plan must include
       details of site levels and Council’s stormwater drain connection point/s. The
       plan must also indicate how stormwater will be collected on the site and
       connected underground to Council’s system.

4.     Prior to the endorsement of plans and prior to the commencement of works
       (including site preparation), in principle approval is required for the crossover
       and driveway to the site from the City of Darwin road reserve, to the
       satisfaction of the consent authority.

5.     Prior to the endorsement of plans and commencement of site works
       (including site preparation), a revised Traffic Impact Assessment in
       accordance with the Austroads Guide to Traffic Management Part 12:
       Traffic Impacts of Development is required for the proposed development.
       The report must detail the development's traffic generation, trip distribution,
       traffic operation impact, the nature and timing of impacts, and
       recommended measures required to accommodate and / or mitigate the
       traffic impacts of the development, including construction traffic on the
       Stuart Highway / Ross Smith Avenue and Stuart Highway / Woolner Road
       intersections. All road sections and/or intersections where traffic generated
       by the development increases the existing traffic, existing proportion of
       heavy vehicle traffic or equivalent standard axles (ESAs) by 5% or more must
       be assessed. The impacts of the development on public transport facilities,
       pedestrian and cycle facilities shall also be assessed. Any intersection and /
       or road upgrade works required to accommodate the proposed
       development and within NTG controlled road reserves shall be carried out
       by the developer, at the developer's cost, to the standards and requirements
       of the TCSD of the DLI, to the satisfaction of the consent authority.

6.     Prior to the commencement of works (including site preparation), the
       applicant is to prepare a dilapidation report covering infrastructure within
       the road reserve to the requirements of City of Darwin, to the satisfaction
       of the consent authority.




                                       Page 3 of 50

      These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                   Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
      Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
     Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

7.     Prior to the commencement of works (including site preparation), a waste
       management plan addressing the City of Darwin’s Waste Management
       Guidelines must be prepared, to the requirements of the City of Darwin, to
       the satisfaction of the consent authority.

8.     Prior to the commencement of works (including site preparation), the
       applicant is to prepare a Site Construction Management Plan (SCMP) to the
       requirements of the City of Darwin, to the satisfaction of the consent
       authority. The SCMP should specifically address the impact to Council
       owned public spaces and include a waste management plan for disposal of
       waste to Shoal Bay, traffic control for affected City of Darwin roads, haulage
       routes, storm water drainage & sediment control, use of City of Darwin land,
       and how this land will be managed during the construction phase.

GENERAL CONDITIONS

9.     The works carried out under this permit shall be in accordance with the
       drawings endorsed as forming part of this permit.

10. The use and development as shown on the endorsed plans must not be
    altered without the further consent of the consent authority.

11. The owner of the land must enter into agreements with the relevant
    authorities for the provision of water supply, drainage, sewerage, electricity
    and telecommunication networks to the development shown on the
    endorsed plan in accordance with the authorities’ requirements and relevant
    legislation at the time. Please refer to notations 2, 3 and 4 for further
    information.

12. Any developments on or adjacent to any easements on site shall be carried
    out to the requirements of the relevant service authority to the satisfaction
    of the consent authority.

13. Stormwater is to be collected and discharged into the drainage network to
    the technical standards of and at no cost to the City of Darwin, to the
    satisfaction of the consent authority.

14. The kerb crossovers and driveways to the site approved by this permit are
    to meet the technical standards of City of Darwin, to the satisfaction of the
    consent authority.

15. Upon completion of any works within or impacting upon existing road
    reserves, the infrastructure within the road reserve shall be rehabilitated to
    the standards and requirements of the City of Darwin and returned to the
    condition as documented in the dilapidation report, to the satisfaction of the
    consent authority.

16. Storage for waste disposal bins is to be provided to the requirements of City
    of Darwin, to the satisfaction of the consent authority. This area must be
    graded, drained and screened from public view.


                                       Page 4 of 50

      These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                   Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
      Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
  Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

17. In accordance with City of Darwin By-Laws, prior to occupation, the
    applicant shall ensure that a building number is displayed in a position clearly
    visible from the street. The number must be visible against the background
    on which it is placed, to the requirements and at no cost to City of Darwin,
    to the satisfaction of the consent authority.

18. All works recommended by the traffic impact assessment are to be
    completed to the requirements of TCSD, DLI, to the satisfaction of the
    consent authority.

19. Before the use or occupation of the development starts, the area(s) set-aside
    for the parking of vehicles and access lanes as shown on the endorsed plans
    must be:
    a.    Constructed;
    b.    Properly formed to such levels that they can be used in accordance
          with the plans;
    c.    Surfaced with an all-weather-seal coat;
    d.    Drained;
    e.    Line marked to indicate each car space and all access lanes;
    f.    Clearly marked to show the direction of traffic along access lanes and
          driveways;
          to the satisfaction of the consent authority. Car parking spaces, access
          lanes and driveways must be kept available for these purposes at all
          times.

20. The car parking shown on the endorsed plans must be available at all times
    for the exclusive use of the occupants of the development and their visitors.

21. Before the use / occupation of the development starts, the landscaping
    works shown on the endorsed plans must be carried out and completed, to
    the satisfaction of the consent authority.

22. The landscaping shown on the endorsed plans must be maintained to the
    satisfaction of the consent authority, including that any dead, diseased or
    damaged plants are to be replaced.

23. All air conditioning condensers (including any condenser units required to be
    added or replaced in the future) are to be appropriately screened from public
    view, located so as to minimise thermal and acoustic impacts on
    neighbouring properties and condensate disposed of to ground level in a
    controlled manner, to the satisfaction of the consent authority.

24. All pipes, fixtures, fittings and vents servicing any building on the site must
    be concealed in service ducts or otherwise hidden from view, to the
    satisfaction of the consent authority.

25. No fence, hedge, tree or other obstruction exceeding a height of 0.6m is to
    be planted or erected so that it would obscure sight lines at the junction of
    the driveway and the public street, in accordance with the requirements of
    City of Darwin, to the satisfaction of the consent authority.


                                    Page 5 of 50

   These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
   Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
     Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

26. The Stuart Highway Road frontage is to be appropriately fenced in
    accordance with the TCSD of the DLI, standards and requirements, to the
    satisfaction to the consent authority.

27. Access shall not be permitted to the subject lot from the Stuart Highway
    road reserve. All access arrangements shall be via the internal local road
    network to the standards and approval of the City of Darwin.

NOTES

1.     The Transport and Civil Services Division, of the Department of Logistics
       and Infrastructure advise that:
       a.    All proposed work (including the provision or connection of services)
             within, or impacting upon the Stuart Highway road reserve shall be in
             accordance with the standards and specifications of TCSD, DLI.
             Design documents must be submitted to the TCSD for road agency
             approval and no works are to commence prior to approval.
       b.    A development permit issued under the Planning Act 1999 is not an
             approval for access onto a Territory road. Approval for access to be
             taken from, or constructed within the NTG controlled road reserve
             rests solely with the TCSD, DLI as the approving road authority.
       c.    The developer, and its contractor or service provider is required to
             Obtain a 'Permit to Work within the NTG Road Reserves', prior to the
             commencement of any works within the Stuart Highway road reserve.
       d.    Construction Traffic Management Plan (detailing all appropriate site
             management measures, including construction access, proposed
             haulage routes, vehicle types, protection of existing assets, protection
             of public access and a risk assessment) and/or an Operational Traffic
             Management Plan (detailing access routes, vehicle types and other
             relevant matters, including a risk assessment) shall be submitted to the
             TCSD, DLI for consideration prior to commencement of any works.
       e.    Access shall not be permitted to the subject lot from the Stuart
             Highway road reserve. All access arrangements shall be via the internal
             local road network to the standards and approval of the City of
             Darwin.
       f.    No temporary access for construction purposes shall be permitted
             from the Stuart Highway road reserve. Construction and delivery
             vehicles shall not be parked on the Stuart Highway road reserve.
       g.    The loads of all trucks entering and leaving the site of works are to be
             constrained in such a manner as to prevent the dropping or tracking
             of materials onto streets. This includes ensuring that all wheels, tracks
             and body surfaces are free of mud and other contaminants before
             entering onto the sealed road network. Where tracked material on the
             road pavement becomes a potential safety issue, the developer will be
             obliged to sweep and clean material off the road.
       h.    Surface stormwater run-off from the development site onto the Stuart
             Highway road reserve is not permitted. The developer shall ensure
             that the stormwater run-off from the development site is collected to
             prevent uncontrolled discharge to adjoining lands through the
             provision of kerbing, transverse grated drains and inlet pits, or
             alternatively the site is to be graded to collect the run-off internally.

                                       Page 6 of 50

      These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                   Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
      Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

           Accordingly, stormwater shall be wholly contained within the site and
           discharged into the local underground stormwater system to the
           standards and approval of the TCSD (where it impacts on the NTG
           controlled road reserves), the Crown Land Management Division
           (where it impacts on Crown land or a drainage easement in favour of
           the Territory) and/or the City of Darwin.
  i.       Discharge of untreated waters into the stormwater drainage system is
           not permitted. Any contaminated stormwater shall be isolated,
           contained and treated prior to discharge off-site to the standards and
           requirements of the Department of the Environment Division, of the
           Department of Lands, Planning and Environment and/or the
           Environment Protection Authority.
  j.       All landscaping and setback requirements under the Northern
           Territory Planning Scheme shall be contained within the Lot
           boundaries. Any landscaping proposed by the developer additional to
           planning requirements and within the Stuart Highway road reserve
           shall be to the standards and approval of TCSD, DLI.
  k.       Any proposals for the upgrading/ resurfacing of the Stuart Highway
           footpath/ verge fronting the development shall require the approval
           of the TCSD, DLI.
  l.       The developer shall consider the Department's policy 'Road Traffic
           Noise on NTG controlled roads' and have carried out, in accordance
           with AS3671 Road Traffic Noise Intrusion - Building Siting and
           Construction an assessment by a suitably qualified person of the
           development's present and predicted future exposure to road traffic
           noise levels. All noise attenuation works deemed necessary, i.e.
           building materials and design, lot layout or noise barriers, shall be
           wholly contained within the subject lot (including foundations) and
           carried out and maintained at full cost to the developer.
  m.       The finish of any Prime Identification sign, if erected, shall be such
           that, if illuminated, day and night readability is the same and is of
           constant display (i.e. not flashing or of variable message). The sign shall
           be positioned:
            i.    so as not to create sun or headlight reflection to motorists; and
           ii.    be located entirely (including foundations and aerially) within the
                  subject Lot.
           Advertising signage including temporary or permanent, e.g. 'A' frame,
           vehicle or trailer mounted, etc. shall not be erected or located within
           the Stuart Highway road reserve.

  n.       Any floodlighting or security lighting provided on site is to be shielded
           in a manner to prevent the lighting being noticeable or causing
           nuisance to the Stuart Highway traffic.
  o.       Upon completion of any works within or impacting upon the Stuart
           Highway road reserve, the road reserve shall be rehabilitated to the
           standards and requirements of TCSD, DLI.
  p.       The clearing and future use of the land, including any noise attenuation
           measures, shall not be detrimental to the drainage of the Stuart
           Highway road reserve through the blocking of offlet drains, natural
           drainage channels or overland flow. Alternative proposals to cater for
           the above may be considered by this Department.

                                  Page 7 of 50

 These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
              Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
 Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
     Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

2.     The Power and Water Corporation advises that the Water and Sewer
       Services Development Section (waterdevelopment@powerwater.com.au)
       and         Power            Network           Engineering    Section
       (powerdevelopment@powerwater.com.au) should be contacted via email a
       minimum of 1 month prior to construction works commencing in order to
       determine the Corporation’s servicing requirements, and the need for
       upgrading of on-site and / or surrounding infrastructure.

3.     All developers, including owner-builders, are required to comply with
       Commonwealth telecommunications requirements. Under Commonwealth
       law, developers are generally required to provide fibre-ready pit and pipe in
       their developments at their expense. Developers may be able to access an
       exemption from these arrangements in some circumstances. For more
       information visit www.infrastructure.gov.au/tind

4.     If you choose nbn to service your development, you will need to enter into
       a development agreement with nbn. The first step is to register the
       development via http://www.nbnco.com.au/develop-or-plan-with-the-
       nbn/new-developments.html. Once registered nbn will be in contact to
       discuss the specific requirements for the development. Nbn requires you to
       apply at least 3 months before any civil works commence. All
       telecommunications infrastructure should be built to nbn guidelines found
       at          http://www.nbnco.com.au/develop-or-plan-with-the-nbn/new-
       developments/builders-designers.html

5.     The City of Darwin advise that:
       a.   The proposal includes works within the City of Darwin road reserve.
            All works must comply with City of Darwin policies and guidelines and
            are subject to a separate assessment and approval process by City of
            Darwin. City of Darwin requires that the applicant obtain all necessary
            approvals before commencing any construction in the road reserve.
       b.   The proposed street tree(s) to City of Darwin’s road reserve fronting
            the development shall be carried out at full cost to the developer.
       c.   As street trees will become an asset of City of Darwin, the developer
            should provide City of Darwin specification for the purchasing of
            quality tree stock prior to construction.
       d.   Prior to the establishment of street trees within the road reserve,
            contact shall be made with City of Darwin’s Parks and Reserves to
            ensure appropriate species and planting locations are defined.
       e.   Any proposed signage for the site shall be subject to a separate
            assessment in accordance with City of Darwin’s Policy 6310.100.E.R
            – Outdoor Advertising Signs Code
       f.   Any damaged or removed infrastructure located in, on or over the road
            reserve (inclusive of preexisting street trees), is to be repaired or
            replaced at either the developers or landowners cost, to the
            satisfaction of City of Darwin.
       g.   Designs and specifications for landscaping of the road verges adjacent
            to the property shall be submitted for approval by City of Darwin and
            all approved works shall be constructed at the applicant’s expense, to
            the requirements of City of Darwin.


                                       Page 8 of 50

      These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                   Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
      Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
     Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

       h.       All street trees shall be protected at all times during construction. Any
                tree on a footpath, which is damaged or removed during construction,
                shall be replaced, to the satisfaction of the General Manager,
                Infrastructure of the City of Darwin. A Tree Protection Zone (TPZ)
                shall be constructed for all existing trees to be retained within the
                development, in accordance with Australian Standards – AS 4970-
                2009 ‘Protection of Trees on Development Sites’. Copies of AS 4970-
                2009 ‘Protection of Trees on Development Sites’ can be obtained
                from the Australian Standards website.

6.     This development permit is not an approval to undertake building work. You
       are advised to contact a Northern Territory registered building certifier to
       seek a building permit as required by the Northern Territory Building Act
       1993 before commencing any demolition or construction works.

7.     Any proposed works which fall within the scope of the Construction Industry
       Long Service Leave and Benefits Act 2005 must be notified to NT Build by
       lodgement of the required Project Notification Form. Payment of any levy
       must be made prior to the commencement of any construction activity. NT
       Build should be contacted via email (info@ntbuild.com.au) or by phone on
       08 8936 4070 to determine if the proposed works are subject to the Act.

REASONS FOR THE DECISION

1.     Pursuant to sections 30P(2)(a) and (b) of the Planning Act 1999, the consent
       authority must take into account any planning scheme that applies to the
       land to which the application relates and the amendment proposal contained
       within the application.

       Northern Territory Planning Scheme 2020 (NTPS 2020)

       As the application is Impact Assessable the exercise of discretion by the
       Authority that applies is Clause 1.10(4) (Exercise of Discretion by the
       Consent Authority) of the NTPS2020. Clause 1.10(4) specifies that in
       considering an application for a use or development identified as Impact
       Assessable the consent authority must take into account all of the following:
        a) any relevant requirements, including the purpose of the requirements, as
            set out in Parts 5 or 6;
        b) any Overlays and associated requirements in Part 3 that apply to the land;
        c) the guidance provided by the relevant zone purpose and outcomes in Part
            4, or Schedule 4.1 Specific Use Zones; and
        d) any component of the Strategic Framework relevant to the land as set out
            in Part 2

       An assessment of the relevant parts of the NTPS 2020 is as follows:

       Part 2 – Strategic Framework

       Clause 2.1 (Purpose of Strategic Framework) requires that interpretation of
       the NTPS 2020 and determinations of a consent authority have regard to
       the strategic framework, which provides relevant land use plans and policies

                                       Page 9 of 50

      These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                   Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
      Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

  to ensure that a use or development or proposed use or development is
  consistent with the objectives of the NTPS 2020.

  This clause establishes the strategic framework principles that guide land use
  and development in the Northern Territory; by

  a)       promoting the Objectives of the Planning Act 1999 through the
           establishment of strategic policy and strategic land use plans to guide
           development;
  b)       establishing a strategic direction for the Northern Territory and its regions
           that facilitates long term management of development to achieve
           coordinated and efficient planning outcomes;
  c)       providing guidance on strategic planning priorities and intended outcomes
           of future development;
  d)       balancing the following considerations to inform strategic planning and
           decision making for development:
             i.    the sustainable use of resources and the protection of the natural
                   environment and ecological processes;
            ii.    the integration of land use planning with transport and physical
                   infrastructure planning to provide for the equitable, accessible,
                   logical and efficient provision of such services;
           iii.    the facilitation of industrial, business and other employment and
                   wealth generating activities to promote, support and engender
                   economic development;
           iv.     the promotion of diverse housing options and the integration of
                   planning for community facilities and services to foster a more
                   connected, resilient and supported society;
            v.     the recognition of the unique characteristics, challenges and
                   aspirations in different areas and communities within the scheme
                   area; and
           vi.     the protection of places and buildings, which are of heritage or
                   cultural value.

  Clause 2.2 (Components and Operation of the Strategic Framework)
  specifies that the strategic framework guides the interpretation of all parts
  of the NTPS 2020.

  Clauses 2.3 and Clause 2.4 detail the strategic policies and land use policies
  that the consent authority must consider when making a decision.

  In the case of 2 Railway Street, Parap, the following land use policy applies.

  Darwin Inner Suburbs Area Plan June 2016 (DISAP)

  The DISAP provides the most detailed level of guidance and therefore
  prevails over higher-order Land Use Plans and Strategic Planning Policies.
  The area plan considers higher level land use policy, such as the Darwin
  Regional Land Use Plan and the Compact Urban Growth Policy.




                                 Page 10 of 50

 These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
              Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
 Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

  The site is identified in the DISAP as residential – medium density, as a
  potential area for change and as located in the Parap Village and Woolner
  Activity Centre.

  The Authority notes the assessment completed by Development
  Assessment Services (DAS) which found that the nomination of the site for
  residential – medium density does not preclude the use and development of a
  child care centre, as evidenced by the outcomes of the proposed future
  zoning of MR (Medium Density Residential) which acknowledges the
  contribution of non-residential activities such as child care centres that:
  •      support the needs of the immediate residential community;
  •      are of a scale and intensity compatible with the residential character
         and amenity of the area;
  •      wherever possible, are co-located with other non-residential activities
         in the locality;
  •      avoid adverse impacts on the surrounding road network; and
  •      are managed to minimise unreasonable impacts on the amenity of
         surrounding residents.

  Part 3 – Overlays

  There are no overlays applicable to the site.

  Part 4 – Zones

  The proposed development is not medium density residential, however,
  Zone MR does not preclude the use and development of a child care centre
  and this is evidenced by sub-clause 4 which acknowledges the contribution
  of non-residential activities such as child care centres.

  The Authority notes the assessment of DAS which found that the proposed
  development complies with sub-clause 4 of Zone MR, for the following
  reasons:

  •         The proposed child care centre will serve local community needs in an
            existing residential area and identified activity centre with convenient
            access to existing and emerging residences, educational facilities and
            employment areas;
  •         The design, height, setbacks and appearance of the proposed
            development is compatible with the character of the area, will sit
            comfortably within the streetscape and enhance the site’s relationship
            with the public realm and effectively integrate into the character of
            Parap;
  •         The proposal is co-located with other non-residential uses in the
            locality, with an existing church located directly west of the site and
            the government printing office directly to the east;
  •         Sufficient on-site car parking, safe access and appropriately designed
            accessways are provided in accordance with the requirements of
            Clause 5.2.4 Car Parking Spaces;
  •         The proposed development will minimise unreasonable impacts on
            the amenity of surrounding residents noting:

                                 Page 11 of 50

 These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
              Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
 Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

              o        The single storey scale of the development is consistent with
                       the character of the surrounding area. The building will be well-
                       articulated through building expression as well as a mix of
                       building materials including cement look cladding, timber look
                       cladding, pattern metal perforated screen and skillion
                       colorbond roof;
              o        Given there are no residential properties directly adjoining,
                       there are limited overlooking and noise impacts.

  In addition, the site will be connected to reticulated services, integrates with
  the existing road network and has convenient access to existing open space,
  community and educational facilities in accordance with sub-clause 6 of
  Zone MR.

  As such, if the amendment proposal was to be approved the development
  proposal would be consistent with the purpose of Zone MR.

  Part 5 – Development Requirements

  The Authority notes the assessment of DAS which assessed the
  development proposal against the requirements of the NTPS 2020, as if the
  site were in Zone MR, and found that a variation is required to Clause 5.2.4.4
  (Layout of car parking areas) and Clause 5.2.6.1 (Landscaping in Zones other
  than Zone CB).

  Clause 5.2.4.4 (Layout of car parking areas)

  The purpose of Clause 5.2.4.4 is to ensure that a car parking area is
  appropriately designed, constructed and maintained for its intended purpose.

  Sub-clause 6 of this clause requires a car parking area to be setback 3 metre
  for any road boundary and to provide landscaping within the setback, the
  driveway width to be a minimum of 6 metres and for the car parking spaces
  to be dimensions of 2.5 x 5.5m.

  The proposed car parking area is setback approximately 80mm from the lot
  boundary abutting Stuart Highway, the minimum driveway width is 5.8m and
  the car parking spaces are annotated as 2.5m by 5.4m.

  Mr Kgosiemang advised that full compliance with the 3m setback
  requirement to Stuart Highway of sub-clause 6 cannot be achieved due to
  the angle of the boundary and the proposed siting on the development with
  the play space to front Railway Street.

  Administratively, the consent authority may consent to a car parking area that
  is not in accordance with sub-clause 6 if it is satisfied that the non-compliance
  will not unreasonably impact on the amenity of the surrounding locality.

  A variation to Clause 5.2.4.4 (Layout of car parking areas) in relation to the
  minimum driveway width and the required car parking dimensions could be
  supported as the application is accompanied by a traffic impact assessment

                                 Page 12 of 50

 These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
              Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
 Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

  which confirms that the ‘proposed car parking space dimensions and aisle
  width satisfy requirements in AS 2890.1:2004 Off-street car parking’.

  The Authority notes the DAS assessment which considers that the proposed
  development could be re-configured to achievement compliance with the
  sub-clause 6 setback requirements of Clause 5.2.4.4 (Layout of car parking
  areas) without compromising the extent of landscaping and the proposed
  built form.

  Mr Kgosiemang advised that increasing the car parking area setback by a
  further 1.5m, to a minimum 2m setback from Stuart Highway, is possible
  without reducing the outdoor play space. Mr Kgosiemang acknowledged
  that this would not achieve full compliance with the sub-clause 6
  requirements, however, is appropriate as the proposed boundary fencing
  which will screen the car parking area from the streetscape.

  The Authority notes the justification of Mr Kgosiemang, and will include a
  condition precedent on any future development permit requiring a minimum
  2m setback from Stuart Highway to achieve better compliance with sub-
  clause 6 of clause 5.2.4.4, and allow for the planting of vegetation along the
  boundary to contribute to the amenity of the Stuart Highway streetscape.

  Clause 5.2.6.1 (Landscaping in Zones other than Zone CB)

  The purpose of Clause 5.2.6.1 is to ensure appropriate landscaping that is
  attractive, water efficient and contributes to a safe environment, is provided to
  development to enhance the streetscape and overall amenity of the locality. Sub-
  clause 7 of this clause requires side and rear setbacks to include a minimum
  2 metre landscaped setback.

  The proposed development is setback 850mm to the eastern boundary,
  approximately 80mm to the southern boundary and setback zero to
  3.1 metres to the future western boundary.

  Administratively, the consent authority may consent to landscaping that is not
  in accordance with sub-clauses 5, 6 and 7 only if it is satisfied it is consistent with
  the purpose of this clause and the zone purpose and outcomes, and is appropriate
  to the site having regard to the amenity of the streetscape, and the potential
  impact on the amenity of the locality and adjoining property.

  The Authority notes the DAS assessment, and supports a variation to Clause
  5.2.6.1 (Landscaping in Zones other than Zone CB) for the following reasons:

  •         The site’s context is characterised by a range of landscaping
            outcomes, with the residential properties providing landscaping along
            all boundaries and the existing–residential uses providing landscaping
            predominately to the Railway Street streetscape.
  •         The proposed development contributes to the existing amenity of the
            Railway Street streetscape through the provision of large setbacks
            and areas of landscaping in the setback to Railway Street. Limited
            landscaping is proposed along the side boundaries and to the Stuart

                                 Page 13 of 50

 These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
              Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
 Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
     Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

                 Highway boundary and this is reflective of the existing character and
                 will not impact of the amenity of the adjoining properties, given they
                 are non-residential uses.

       A condition precedent will applied to any future development permit
       requiring that a landscape plan to be prepared and a general condition
       requiring the landscaping plan to be maintained on an ongoing basis. This
       ensures that the proposal development provides adequate landscaping to
       contribute to the amenity of the streetscape.

       Clause 5.5.7 Child Care Centre

       The purpose of Clause 5.5.7 is to ensure that a child care centre:
       a)   is developed in a location that provides convenient vehicle access and does
            not interfere with the safe or efficient operation of the local road, cycle
            and footpath network;
       b)   incorporates appropriate site layout, building and landscape design to
            ensure that there is no unreasonable loss of amenity for adjoining and
            nearby properties.

       Sub-clause 3 specifies to provide landscaping and any necessary screening.

       The architectural drawings provided with the application show indicative
       landscaping however, a landscape plan was not provided as part of the
       application material.

       To ensure on-going compliance and maintenance of the proposed
       landscaping, a condition precedent has been applied to any future approval
       to require a landscape plan to be prepared and a general condition requiring
       the landscaping plan to be maintained on an ongoing basis.

       The Authority further questioned Mr Kgosiemang to understand what
       fencing measures were proposed to ensure safety of children with reference
       to the site’s location along Stuart Highway. Mr Kgosiemang advised that the
       child care centre’s play space will be fully enclosed and the car park area will
       also be fenced.

2.     Pursuant to sections 30P(f) of the Planning Act 1999, the consent authority
       must take into account any information received as a result of consultations
       carried out, submissions received, or evidence given at a hearing.

       One public submission was received during the exhibition period. The
       submitter indicated their strong opposition to any future access from Stuart
       Highway to Railway Street, however, did not raise any other matters or
       concerns, and supported the proposal as detailed in the application.

       The Authority noted the submitter’s concerns and highlighted that the
       proposed development does not propose access to or from the Stuart
       Highway.




                                      Page 14 of 50

      These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                   Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
      Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
     Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

       Furthermore, at the request of the Transport and Civil Services Division of
       the Department of Logistics and Infrastructure, a condition will be applied to
       any future approval stating that access shall not be permitted to the subject
       lot from the Stuart Highway road reserve. Noting this on any permit, in line
       with the service authority’s comments, would address the submitter’s
       concern.

3.     Pursuant to Section 30P(2)(l) of the Planning Act 1999, the consent authority
       must take into consideration the capability of the public utilities or
       infrastructure provided in the area in which the land is situated and any
       requirement for public facilities and services to be connected to the land;
       and facilities, infrastructure or land to be provided by the applicant.

       The land is capable of supporting the proposed development. Comments
       from service authorities have been sought in relation to the capability of the
       land. The requirements of service authorities are addressed through
       conditions and notes on the permit, where appropriate.

       At the hearing, Mr Kgosiemang advised that the proposed development
       would comply with the City of Darwin’s waste management requirements.

4.     Pursuant to Section 30P(2)(j) of the Planning Act 1999, the consent authority
       must take into account the potential impact on the existing and future
       amenity of the area in which the land is situated.

       Amenity is defined in the Planning Act 1999 as: in relation to a locality or
       building, any quality, condition or factor that makes or contributes to making the
       locality or building harmonious, pleasant or enjoyable.

       The site is identified within the DISAP as having potential for change from
       Zone SC (Service Commercial) to Zone MR (Medium-density residential).

       The Authority notes the DAS report which concludes the proposed
       development has been designed to ensure unreasonable impacts on the
       amenity of nearby dwellings (and future dwellings) are avoided, for the
       following reasons:

       •          The single storey scale of the development is consistent with the
                  character of the surrounding area. The building will be well-
                  articulated through building expression as well as a mix of building
                  materials including cement look cladding, timber look cladding,
                  pattern metal perforated screen and skillion colourbond roof.
       •          Given there are no residential properties directly adjoining, there are
                  limited overlooking and noise impacts.
       •          Sufficient on-site car parking, safe access and appropriately designed
                  accessways are provided.




                                      Page 15 of 50

      These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                   Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
      Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
                   Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

RESOLVED      That, pursuant to section 30Q of the Planning Act 1999, the consent authority
06/25         report to the Minister for Lands, Planning and Environment advising of the likely
              decision in relation to the development proposal, issues raised in the submissions,
              issues raised at the hearing and any other matters it considers the Minister should
              take into account when considering the amendment proposal.

RESOLVED      That, pursuant to section 86(1) of the Planning Act 1999, the Development
07/25         Consent Authority delegates its powers to the Chair, or in the absence of the
              Chair, any member of the Darwin Division of the Authority to:

              •      determine pursuant to Section 30W(1)(a) to consent to the development
                     proposal contained in the concurrent application, and consent to the
                     concurrent application after receipt of a notice under Section 30U(1) that
                     the Minister has approved the amendment proposal contained in the
                     application;
              •      serve a notice of determination under Section 30X(2) in relation to the
                     determination of the development proposal and each person who made a
                     submission.
              •      issue a development permit under section 54(2) in relation to the
                     development proposal to develop Lot 5021 Town of Darwin (2) Railway
                     Street, Parap, Town of Darwin for the purpose of child care centre in a single
                     storey building and issue the relevant notices under Section 30Y.

              FOR: 5                                    AGAINST: 0                                ABSTAIN: 0

              ACTION: Report to the Minister


ITEM 2
              MULTIPLE DWELLINGS (2 X 3 BEDROOM) IN A SINGLE STOREY BUILDING
PA2024/0245
              LOT 11424 (17) MORRIS STREET, MUIRHEAD, TOWN OF NIGHTCLIFF
APPLICANT     One Planning Consult

              Applicant: - Israel Kgosiemang (One Planning Consult) attended.

RESOLVED      That, the Development Consent Authority pursuant to section 53(a) of the
08/25         Planning Act 1999 consent to the application to develop Lot 11424 (17) Morris
              Street, Muirhead, Town of Nightcliff for the purpose of multiple dwellings (2 x 3
              bedroom) in a single storey building, subject to the following conditions:

              CONDITION PRECEDENT

              1.     Prior to the commencement of works (including site preparation), the
                     applicant is to prepare a dilapidation report covering infrastructure within
                     the road reserve to the requirements of the City of Darwin.

              2.     Prior to the commencement of works (including site preparation), in principle
                     approval is required for the crossover and driveway to the site from the City
                     of Darwin road reserve to the satisfaction of the consent authority.

              3.     Prior to the commencement of works (including site preparation), an

                                                    Page 16 of 50

                    These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                                 Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
                    Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
     Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

       engineered plan completed by a suitably qualified civil engineer
       demonstrating the on-site collection of stormwater and its discharge into
       the local underground stormwater drainage system, shall be submitted to,
       and approved by the City of Darwin, to the satisfaction of the consent
       authority. The plan shall include details of site levels, and Council’s
       stormwater drain connection point/s and connection details.

4.     Prior to the commencement of works (including site preparation), the
       applicant is to prepare a Site Construction Management Plan (SCMP) to the
       requirements of the City of Darwin, to the satisfaction of the consent
       authority. The SCMP should specifically address the impact to Council
       owned public spaces and include a waste management plan for disposal of
       waste to Shoal Bay, traffic control for affected City of Darwin roads, haulage
       routes, storm water drainage & sediment control, use of City of Darwin land,
       and how this land will be managed during the construction phase.

GENERAL CONDITIONS

5.     The works carried out under this permit shall be in accordance with the
       drawings numbered 2024/0245/01 to 2024/0245/13, endorsed as forming
       part of this permit.

6.     The owner of the land must enter into agreements with the relevant
       authorities for the provision of water supply, drainage, sewerage, electricity
       and telecommunication networks to the development shown on the
       endorsed plan in accordance with the authorities’ requirements and relevant
       legislation at the time.

Please refer to notations 1, 2, 3, and 4 for further information.

7.     Any developments on or adjacent to any easements on site shall be carried
       out to the requirements of the relevant service authority to the satisfaction
       of the consent authority.

8.     Stormwater is to be collected and discharged into the drainage network to
       the technical standards of and at no cost to the City of Darwin, to the
       satisfaction of the consent authority.

9.     Upon completion of any works within or impacting upon existing road
       reserves, the infrastructure within the road reserve shall be rehabilitated to
       the standards and requirements of the City of Darwin and returned to the
       condition as documented in the dilapidation report, to the satisfaction of the
       consent authority.

10. The kerb crossovers and driveways to the site approved by this permit are
    to meet the technical standards of the City of Darwin, to the satisfaction of
    the consent authority.

11. The owner shall:
    (a)  remove disused vehicle and/ or pedestrian crossovers;
    (b) provide footpaths/ cycleways;

                                      Page 17 of 50

      These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                   Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
      Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
     Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

       (c)    collect stormwater and discharge it to the drainage network; and
       (d) undertake reinstatement works;
       all to the technical requirements of and at no cost to the City of Darwin, to
       the satisfaction of the consent authority.

12. No fence, hedge, tree or other obstruction exceeding a height of 0.6m is to
    be planted or erected so that it would obscure sight lines at the junction of
    the driveway and the public street to the requirements of the City of Darwin,
    to the satisfaction of the consent authority.

13. Stormwater is to be collected and discharged into the drainage network to
    the technical standards of and at no cost to the City of Darwin, to the
    satisfaction of the consent authority.

14. All waste material not required for further on-site processing must be
    regularly removed from the site to an approved facility. All vehicles removing
    waste must have fully secured and contained loads so that no wastes are
    spilled or dust or odour is created to the satisfaction of the consent
    authority.

NOTES

1.     The Power and Water Corporation advises that the Water and Sewer
       Services Development Section (waterdevelopment@powerwater.com.au)
       and         Power           Network           Engineering     Section
       (powerdevelopment@powerwater.com.au) should be contacted via email a
       minimum of 1 month prior to construction works commencing in order to
       determine the Corporation’s servicing requirements, and the need for
       upgrading of on-site and/or surrounding infrastructure.

2.     Power and Water Corporation advise that prior to initial reviews and
       assessments being undertaken to determine Power and Water Corporations
       servicing requirements, the developer should submit an Expression of
       Interest (EoI) form via email to remotedevelopment@powerwater.com.au

3.     All developers, including owner-builders, are required to comply with
       Commonwealth telecommunications requirements. Under Commonwealth
       law, developers are generally required to provide fibre-ready pit and pipe in
       their developments at their expense. Developers may be able to access an
       exemption from these arrangements in some circumstances. For more
       information visit www.infrastructure.gov.au/tind

4.     If you choose nbn to service your development, you will need to enter into
       a development agreement with nbn. The first step is to register the
       development via http://www.nbnco.com.au/develop-or-plan-with-the-
       nbn/new-developments.html once registered nbn will be in contact to
       discuss the specific requirements for the development. Nbn requires you to
       apply at least 3 months before any civil works commence. All
       telecommunications infrastructure should be built to nbn guidelines found
       at          http://www.nbnco.com.au/develop-or-plan-with-the-nbn/new-
       developments/builders-designers.html

                                      Page 18 of 50

      These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                   Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
      Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
     Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025


5.     A “Permit to Work Within a Road Reserve” may be required from the City
       of Darwin before commencement of any work within the road reserve.

6.     In accordance with City of Darwin By-Laws, prior to occupation, the
       applicant shall ensure that a building number is displayed in a position clearly
       visible from the street. The number must be visible against the background
       on which it is placed, to the satisfaction and at no cost to City of Darwin.

7.     Designs and specifications for landscaping of the road verges adjacent to the
       property shall be submitted for approval by City of Darwin and all approved
       works shall be constructed at the applicant’s expense, to the requirements
       of City of Darwin.

8.     Any proposed works on/over City of Darwin property shall be subject to
       separate application to City of Darwin and shall be carried out to the
       requirements and satisfaction of City of Darwin.

REASONS FOR THE DECISION

1.     Pursuant to section 51(a) of the Planning Act 1999, the consent authority
       must take into consideration the planning scheme that applies to the land to
       which the application relates.

       This application is to be determined under the Northern Territory Planning
       Scheme 2007 (NTPS 2007), because under Schedule 4: Specific Use Zones
       of the NT Planning Scheme 2020, it states that the Specific Use Zones listed
       in the Table to the Schedule (of which SD23 is one) are subject to the
       relevant requirements contained in the NTPS2007.

       Under the NTPS 2007, Clause 5.2.1 (General Height Control), Clause 5.2.4
       (Car Parking), Clause 6.5.1 (Parking Requirements, Clause 7.1 (Residential
       Density and Height Limitations), Clause 7.3 (Building Setbacks of Residential
       Buildings and Ancillary Structures), Clause 7.5 (Private Open Space), Clause
       7.6 (Communal Open Space), Clause 7.7 (Landscaping for Multiple
       Dwellings, Hostels and Supporting Accommodation), and Clause 7.8
       (Building Design for Multiple Dwellings, Hostels and Supporting
       Accommodation) need to be considered.

       The Authority noted the assessment completed by Development
       Assessment Services (DAS), which concludes the proposal complies with the
       relevant requirements of the NTPS 2007.

2.     Pursuant to section 51(j) of the Planning Act 1999, the consent authority
       must take into consideration the capability of the land to which the
       proposed development relates to support the proposed development and
       the effect of the development on the land and on other land, the physical
       characteristics of which may be affected by the development.

       The land is capable of supporting the proposed development. Dwelling-
       multiple is an expected form of development within Muirhead. The land is

                                      Page 19 of 50

      These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                   Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
      Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
                   Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

                     not impacted by any overlays. Service authorities did not identify any issues
                     of concern in relation to land capability that would not ordinarily be
                     addressed via standard conditions on a permit. Additionally, the Department
                     of Lands, Planning, and Environment did not identify or raise any issues of
                     concern in relation to land capability.

                     The Authority note that the conditions on the permit will reasonably address
                     land capability concerns identified by the relevant service authorities.

              3.     Pursuant to Section 51(n) of the Planning Act 1999, the consent authority
                     must take into consideration the potential impact on the existing and future
                     amenity of the area in which the land is situated.

                     The impact on amenity should be considered in context of the site and its
                     surrounds. The proposal is consistent with Zone SD23, in that the land is
                     identified for the development of multiple dwellings, and that the proposal
                     is consistent with the applicable clauses under the NTPS 2007. As such, the
                     development would be unlikely to have an unreasonably adverse impact on
                     the existing and future amenity of the area

              FOR: 5                                    AGAINST: 0                                ABSTAIN: 0

              ACTION: Notice of Consent and Development Permit


ITEM 3        THIS APPLICATION WAS WITHDRAWN FROM THIS MEETING



ITEM 4        DWELLING-MULTIPLE (72 X ONE BEDROOM AND 24 X TWO BEDROOM)
PA2024/0340   IN A 9 STOREY BUILDING INCLUDING 2.5 LEVELS OF ABOVE - GROUND
              LEVEL CAR PARKING.
              LOT 8895 (20) HARVEY STREET, DARWIN CITY, TOWN OF DARWIN
APPLICANT     Atelier Mark Bell Pty Ltd

              Applicant: Mark Bell (Atelier Mark Bell Pty Ltd) attended.

RESOLVED      That, the Development Consent Authority reduce the car parking requirements
09/25         pursuant to clause 5.9.2.12 Reduction in car parking spaces in Darwin City
              Centre, and vary the requirements of Clauses 5.2.4.4 Layout of Car Parking Area,
              5.4.6.2 Private Open Space for Dwelling-multiple, 5.4.7 Communal Open Space,
              5.4.17 Building Articulation, 5.5.17 Building Frontage in Commercial and Mixed
              Use Areas and 5.9.2.13 Design of Car Parking Areas and Vehicle Access, of the
              Northern Territory Planning Scheme 2020, and pursuant to section 53(a) of the
              Planning Act 1999, consent to the application to develop Lot 08895 (20) Harvey
              Street, Darwin City, Town of Darwin for the purpose of dwelling-multiple (72 x
              one bedroom and 24 x two bedroom) in a 9 storey building including 2.5 levels
              of above - ground level car parking, subject to the following conditions:




                                                    Page 20 of 50

                    These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                                 Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
                    Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
     Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

CONDITIONS PRECEDENT

1.     Prior to the endorsement of plans and prior to the commencement of works
       (including site preparation), approval is required for the provision of awnings
       to the street frontages to the requirements of the City of Darwin, to the
       satisfaction of the consent authority.

2.     Prior to the endorsement of plans and prior to the commencement of works
       (including site preparation), approval is required by the City of Darwin for
       any element of the building (separate to awnings) that is designed to be
       constructed or installed over the City of Darwin road reserve, to the
       satisfaction of the consent authority.

3.     Prior to the endorsement of plans and prior to the commencement of works
       (including site preparation), a schematic plan demonstrating the on-site
       collection of stormwater and its discharge into the City of Darwin
       stormwater drainage system shall be submitted to and approved by the City
       of Darwin, to the satisfaction of the consent authority. The plan shall
       include details of site levels and Council’s stormwater drain connection
       point/s. The plan shall also indicate how stormwater will be collected on the
       site and connected underground to Council’s system.

4.     Prior to the endorsement of plans and prior to the commencement of works
       (including site preparation), in principle approval is required for the crossover
       and driveway to the site from the City of Darwin road reserve, to the
       satisfaction of the consent authority.

5.     Prior to the commencement of works, the applicant is to prepare a
       dilapidation report covering infrastructure within the road reserve to the
       requirements of City of Darwin, to the satisfaction of the consent authority.
6.     Prior to the commencement of works (including site preparation), a waste
       management plan addressing the City of Darwin’s Waste Management
       Guidelines must be prepared, to the requirements of the City of Darwin, to
       the satisfaction of the consent authority.

7.     Prior to the commencement of works (including site preparation), the
       applicant is to prepare a Site Construction Management Plan (SCMP) to the
       requirements of the City of Darwin, to the satisfaction of the consent
       authority. The SCMP should specifically address waste management plan for
       disposal of waste to Shoal Bay, traffic control for affected City of Darwin
       roads, haulage routes, storm water drainage & sediment control, use of City
       of Darwin land, and how this land will be managed during the construction
       phase.

GENERAL CONDITIONS

8.     The works carried out under this permit shall be in accordance with the
       drawings endorsed as forming part of this permit.

9.     The owner of the land must enter into agreements with the relevant
       authorities for the provision of water supply, drainage, sewerage, electricity

                                      Page 21 of 50

      These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                   Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
      Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
  Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

    and telecommunication networks to the development shown on the
    endorsed plan in accordance with the authorities’ requirements and relevant
    legislation at the time. Please refer to notations 1, 2 and 3 for further
    information.

10. Any developments on or adjacent to any easements on site shall be carried
    out to the requirements of the relevant service authority to the satisfaction
    of the consent authority.

11. All existing and proposed easements and sites for existing and required
    utility services must be vested in the relevant authority for which the
    easement or site is to be created.

12. Stormwater is to be collected and discharged into the drainage network to
    the technical standards of and at no cost to City of Darwin, to the
    satisfaction of the consent authority.

13. Before the use or occupation of the development starts, the area(s) set-aside
    for the parking of vehicles and access lanes as shown on the endorsed plans
    must be:
    a)    constructed;
    b)    properly formed to such levels that they can be used in accordance
          with the plans;
    c)    surfaced with an all-weather-seal coat;
    d)    drained;
    e)    line marked to indicate each car space and all access lanes; and
    f)    clearly marked to show the direction of traffic along access lanes and
          driveways;
    to the satisfaction of the consent authority. Car parking spaces, access lanes
    and driveways must be kept available for these purposes at all times.

14. The kerb crossovers and driveways to the site approved by this permit are
    to meet the technical standards of City of Darwin to the satisfaction of the
    consent authority.

15. The owner shall:
    a)   remove disused vehicle and/ or pedestrian crossovers;
    b)   provide footpaths/ cycleways;
    c)   collect stormwater and discharge it to the drainage network; and
    d)   undertake reinstatement works;
         all to the technical requirements of and at no cost to the City of
         Darwin, to the satisfaction of the consent authority.

16. All proposed works impacting on Harvey Street are to be designed,
    supervised and certified on completion by a practicing and registered civil
    engineer, and shall be in accordance with the standards and specifications
    of the City of Darwin. Drawings must be submitted to the City of Darwin,
    for approval and no works are to commence prior to approval and receipt of
    a "Permit to Work Within a Road Reserve".




                                   Page 22 of 50

   These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
   Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
  Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

17. No fence, hedge, tree or other obstruction exceeding a height of 0.6m is to
    be planted or erected so that it would obscure sight lines at the junction of
    the driveway and the public street, in accordance with the requirements of
    City of Darwin, to the satisfaction of the consent authority.

18. Before the use/occupation of the development starts, the landscaping works
    shown on the endorsed plans must be carried out and completed, to the
    satisfaction of the consent authority.

19. The landscaping shown on the endorsed plans must be maintained to the
    satisfaction of the consent authority, including that any dead, diseased or
    damaged plants are to be replaced.

20. Prior to the use/occupation of the development and connection of services
    (i.e. power and water), the owner of the land must apply for street addressing
    from the Surveyor-General of the Northern Territory. This will form the legal
    address and will be required to be placed on the meters within the
    development in accordance with the allocation. An Occupancy Permit will
    not be able to be granted until such time as addressing is obtained.

21. Waste bin enclosures, storage and pick-up shall be provided in accordance
    with City of Darwin’s Waste Management Guidelines, to the satisfaction of
    the consent authority.

22. All roof top plant equipment, equipment relating to the operation of the lift
    and any other equipment (such as any vents and ducting associated with
    requirements for stairwell pressurisation or other such ventilation purposes
    or similar) that will placed on the rooftop of the development shall be
    appropriately screened, or designed to soften the visual impact of such
    equipment from view from neighbouring or nearby developments (or
    developments reasonably anticipated).

23. All balconies are to be internally drained and discharge is to be disposed of
    at ground level and in a manner consistent with stormwater disposal
    arrangements for the site to the satisfaction of the consent authority.

24. A Compliance Certificate under the Swimming Pool Safety Act 2004 issued
    by the Swimming Pool Safety Authority is required for the swimming pool
    prior to the commencement of the use/development to the satisfaction of
    the consent authority.

25. Upon completion of any works within or impacting upon existing road
    reserves, the infrastructure within the road reserve shall be rehabilitated to
    the standards and requirements of the City of Darwin and returned to the
    condition as documented in the dilapidation report.

26. All pipes, fixtures, fittings and vents servicing any building on the site must
    be concealed in service ducts or otherwise hidden from view, to the
    satisfaction of the consent authority.




                                   Page 23 of 50

   These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
   Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
     Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

27. All substation, fire booster and water meter arrangements are to be
    appropriately screened to soften the visual impact of such infrastructure on
    the streetscape, to ensure that the infrastructure is sympathetic to and
    blends in with the design of the building. Details will need to be resolved to
    the satisfaction of the consent authority in consultation with the Power and
    Water Corporation, and NT Fire and Emergency Services.

NOTES

1.      The Power and Water Corporation advises that the Water and Sewer
        Services Development Section (waterdevelopment@powerwater.com.au)
        and         Power           Network           Engineering     Section
        (powerdevelopment@powerwater.com.au) should be contacted via email a
        minimum of 1 month prior to construction works commencing in order to
        determine the Corporation’s servicing requirements, and the need for
        upgrading of on-site and/or surrounding infrastructure.

2.      All developers, including owner-builders, are required to comply with
        Commonwealth telecommunications requirements. Under Commonwealth
        law, developers are generally required to provide fibre-ready pit and pipe in
        their developments at their expense. Developers may be able to access an
        exemption from these arrangements in some circumstances. For more
        information visit www.infrastructure.gov.au/tind.

3.      If you choose nbn to service your development, you will need to enter into
        a development agreement with nbn. The first step is to register the
        development via http://www.nbnco.com.au/develop-or-plan-with-the-
        nbn/new-developments.html once registered nbn will be in contact to
        discuss the specific requirements for the development. Nbn requires you
        to apply at least 3 months before any civil works commence. All
        telecommunications infrastructure should be built to nbn guidelines found
        at         http://www.nbnco.com.au/develop-or-plan-with-the-nbn/new-
        developments/builders-designers.html.

4.      Darwin International Airport advises that separate requests for assessment
        and approval must be submitted to Darwin International Airport and the
        Department of Defence NT for any cranes used during construction that
        will infringe on either the Obstacle Limitation Surfaces (OLS) or Procedures
        for Air Navigation Services – Operations (PANS-OPS) surfaces for Darwin
        Airport.

5.      The Surveyor-General advises you should immediately make application for
        unit/street addresses to the Survey and Land Records unit on (08) 8995
        5346 (surveylandrecords@nt.gov.au).

6.      A “Permit to Work Within a Road Reserve” may be required from City of
        Darwin before commencement of any work within the road reserve.

7.      There are statutory obligations under the Waste Management and Pollution
        Control Act 1998 (the Act), that require all persons to take all measures that
        are reasonable and practicable to prevent or minimise pollution or

                                      Page 24 of 50

      These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                   Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
      Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
     Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

        environmental harm and reduce the amount of waste. The proponent is
        required to comply at all times with the Act, including the General
        Environmental Duty under Section 12 of the Act. There is also a
        requirement to obtain an authorisation prior to conducting any of the
        activities listed in Schedule 2 of the Act. Guidelines to assist proponents to
        avoid environmental impacts are available on the Northern Territory
        Environment             Protection        Authority         website         at
        http://ntepa.ntg.gov.au/waste-pollution/guidelines/guidelines.

8.      This development permit is not an approval to undertake building work. You
        are advised to contact a Northern Territory registered building certifier to
        seek a building permit as required by the Northern Territory Building Act
        1993 before commencing any demolition or construction works.

9.      Any proposed works which fall within the scope of the Construction Industry
        Long Service Leave and Benefits Act 2005 must be notified to NT Build by
        lodgement of the required Project Notification Form. Payment of any levy
        must be made prior to the commencement of any construction activity. NT
        Build should be contacted via email (info@ntbuild.com.au) or by phone on
        08 8936 4070 to determine if the proposed works are subject to the Act.

10. In accordance with City of Darwin By-Laws, prior to occupation, the
    applicant shall ensure that a building number is displayed in a position
    clearly visible from the street. The number must be visible against the
    background on which it is placed, to the satisfaction and at no cost to City
    of Darwin.

11. Sediment control measures are to be established and maintained, to prevent
    silt and sediment escaping the site or causing erosion.

12. Building rubbish or debris must not be placed, or be permitted to be placed,
    on any adjoining public reserve, footpath or road, without first obtaining
    approval from City of Darwin.

13. Any proposed signage for the site shall be subject to a separate assessment
    in accordance with City of Darwin’s Policy 6310.100.E.R – Outdoor
    Advertising Signs Code.

REASONS FOR THE DECISION

1.     Pursuant to section 51(1)(a) of the Planning Act 1999, the consent authority
       must take into consideration the planning scheme that applies to the land to
       which the application relates.

       The NT Planning Scheme 2020 (NTPS 2020) applies to the land and
       Dwelling-Multiple requires consent under Clause 1.8 (When development
       consent is required). It is identified as Merit Assessable under Clause 4.10
       therefore the zone purpose and outcomes of Clause 4.10 Zone CB (Central
       Business) and Clauses 5.2.1 General Height Control, 5.2.4 Car Parking, 5.2.5
       Loading Bays, 5.2.6 Landscaping, 5.2.7 Setbacks for Development Adjacent
       to Land in Zones LR, LMR, MR or HR, 5.3.7 End of Trip Facilities in Zones

                                      Page 25 of 50

      These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                   Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
      Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
     Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

       HR, CB, C, SC and TC, 5.4.4 Extensions and Structures Ancillary to a
       Dwelling–Group or Dwelling-Multiple Development 5.4.6 Private Open
       Space, 5.4.7 Communal Open Space, 5.4.17 Building Articulation, 5.5.15
       Design in Commercial and Mixed Use Areas, 5.5.17 Building Frontage in
       Commercial and Mixed Use Areas and 5.9.2 Darwin City Centre, need to be
       considered.

       The Authority notes the assessment of Development Assessment Services
       (DAS) which found that the proposed development complies with the
       relevant requirements of the NTPS 2020 except for Clauses 5.2.4.4 Layout
       of Car Parking Area, 5.4.6.2 Private Open Space for Dwelling-multiple, 5.4.7
       Communal Open Space, 5.4.17 Building Articulation, 5.5.17 Building
       Frontage in Commercial and Mixed Use Areas, 5.9.2.11 Car parking spaces
       in Darwin City Centre and 5.9.2.13 Design of Car Parking Areas and Vehicle
       Access.

       To confirm compliance with Clause 5.5.15 Design in Commercial and Mixed
       Use Areas, the Authority sought confirmation of the location of the air
       conditioner units and substation. Mr Bell confirmed that the air conditioner
       condenser units are located on the roof, with each apartment provided its
       own riser to directly connect to the units and the substation is located at the
       ground floor.

       The Authority also questioned whether the waste chutes have been
       acoustically treated. Mr Bell confirmed that proposed Wastetech garbage
       chute system uses plastic chutes in lieu of traditional steel chutes, which
       allow for quieter and smoother waste disposal. As part of its deferral
       response, the applicant confirmed that the chutes provide both noise and
       vibration prevention and do not require additional acoustic lagging as
       typically required with steel chute systems.

2.     Pursuant to Clause 1.10 (Exercise of Discretion by the Consent Authority),
       subclause 5 of the NT Planning Scheme 2020, the consent authority may
       consent to a proposed development which is not in accordance with a
       requirement set out in Parts 3, 5 or 6 only if it is satisfied that the variation
       is appropriate having regard to:
              a. The purpose and administration clauses of the requirement; and
              b. The considerations listed under Clause 1.10(3) or 1.10(4).

       As the application is Merit Assessable the exercise of discretion by the
       consent authority that applies is Clause 1.10(3) (Exercise of Discretion by
       the Consent Authority) of the NTPS2020.

       In considering an application for a use or development identified as Merit
       Assessable the consent authority must take into account all of the following:
           a) the relevant requirements, including the purpose of the requirements, as
              set out in Parts 5 or 6;
           b) any Overlays and associated requirements in Part 3 that apply to the
              land; and
           c) the guidance provided by the relevant zone purpose and outcomes in
              Part 4 relevant to a variation of requirements in Parts 5 or 6.

                                      Page 26 of 50

      These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                   Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
      Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025


  An assessment of the relevant parts of NTPS2020 is as follows:

  Part 3 – Overlays

  There are no overlays applicable to the site.

  Part 4 – Zoning

  Clause 4.10 Zone CB – Central Business

  The purpose is to ‘promote an active and attractive mixed use environment that
  maximises its function as the commercial, cultural, administrative, tourist and
  civic centre for the surrounding region that is integrated with high density
  residential development’.

  The proposed development supports the purpose of Zone CB as it is for a 9
  storey high density residential development on a site that is well located in
  the Darwin CBD with access to public transport, community services and
  employment opportunities.

  In relation to the proposed developments’ variation of Clause 5.4.17 Building
  Articulation (see below for consideration of this clause), the sub-clause 8
  Zone CB requirement is relevant.

  Sub-clause 8 requires that ‘development incorporates innovative building
  design, site layout and landscaping that:

  a)       responds to and encourage pleasant microclimates, including through
           breeze capture and shading

  At the hearing, the Authority noted that while the NTPS 2020 does not
  require habitable rooms to have external wall facing windows, it is
  acknowledged that the proposed design provides adequate breeze capture
  and access to light. Mr Bell explained that the proposed design exceeds the
  minimum National Construction Code ventilation and natural light
  requirements.

  The Authority notes that the applicant provided a written response and
  supplemental drawing explaining how each dwelling is able to capture
  breezes and channel these through the apartments and the central walkway.
  As part of their deferral response, the applicant advised there is an existing
  3 metre wide services easement along the western common boundary on
  the adjoining property and therefore in their opinion any future development
  would be setback 3 metres from the common boundary ensuring that the
  light court / void of the proposed development retains access to natural light
  and ventilation. If a future development were to be built up against the
  proposed development, this would require light courts /void to be mirrored
  in order to preserve the proposed developments access to natural light and
  ventilation. As a result of the above justification, the proposed development
  is considered to comply with sub-clause 8(a).

                                 Page 27 of 50

 These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
              Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
 Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

  Part 5 – Development Requirements

  The Authority notes the assessment of DAS which found that the proposed
  development is not in accordance with Clauses 5.2.4.4 Layout of Car Parking
  Area, 5.4.6.2 Private Open Space for Dwelling-multiple, 5.4.7 Communal
  Open Space, 5.4.17 Building Articulation, 5.5.17 Building Frontage in
  Commercial and Mixed Use Areas, 5.9.2.11 Car parking spaces in Darwin
  City Centre, and 5.9.2.13 Design of Car Parking Areas and Vehicle Access.

  Clause 5.2.4.4 Layout of Car Parking Area

  The purpose of the clause is to ‘ensure that a car parking area is appropriately
  designed, constructed and maintained for its intended purpose’.

  With reference to sub-clause 8(d), car parking space No.89 is 2.5 metre wide,
  and is perpendicular to the end of a driveway, which only projects 0.718
  metres beyond that car parking space, and therefore does not comply with
  the requirement. At the hearing, Mr Bell highlighted that this is a minor non-
  compliance.

  Administratively, sub-clause 3 specifies that ‘the consent authority may
  consent to a car parking area that is not in accordance with sub-clauses 7 and 8
  if it is satisfied that the design and construction is safe and functional with regard
  to the location of the development’.

  The proposed variation to the car parking area driveway projection was
  considered appropriate as the application is accompanied by a traffic impact
  assessment that confirms ‘on-site car parking has been designed in accordance
  with the relevant clauses of AS/ NZS 2890.1 and 2890.2’.

  Clause 5.4.6.2 Private Open Space for Dwelling-multiple

  The purpose of the clause is to ‘ensure dwellings include private open space
  that enhances the function of the dwelling and are:
  a)    of an adequate size to provide for outdoor living; and
  b)    appropriately sited to provide outlook for the dwelling’.

  With reference to sub-clause 3(a), each dwelling is provided with a minimum
  area of 12m2 with no dimensions less than 2.8m, except for the north-
  western corner dwelling (at levels 4 – 9) which has a minimum width of 2.4m.

  Administratively, sub-clause 2 specifies that ‘the consent authority may
  consent to dwellings-multiple, other than dwellings-multiple comprising of
  serviced apartments in Zone TC, that is not in accordance with sub-clauses 3-5
  if is satisfied the development is consistent with the purpose of this clause’.

  The proposed variation to the balcony width of the north-eastern corner
  apartments (affecting 6 apartments) is appropriate for the following reasons:
  •     The proposed balconies comply with the minimum area requirement.
  •     The proposed balconies are sited to take advantage of views towards
        Darwin Harbour.

                                 Page 28 of 50

 These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
              Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
 Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

  •        The proposed balconies have a minimum width of 2.4 metres which is
           considered adequate size to provide for outdoor living.
  •        Furthermore, the development provides communal open space which
           provides opportunities for residents of the development to utilise as
           wanted, enhancing the function of the dwellings.

  Clause 5.4.7 Communal Open Space

  The purpose of the clause is to ‘ensure that suitable areas for communal open
  space are provided for dwellings-multiple, residential care facilities and rooming
  accommodation’.

  With reference to sub-clause 5, the proposed communal open space includes
  areas that are less than 6m wide, and therefore does not comply.

  Administratively, sub-clause 3 specifies that ‘the consent authority may
  consent to a development in Zone C or Zone CB that is not in accordance with
  sub-clauses 5 and 6 if appropriate recreational space for the occupants of the
  development is provided, having regard to the following matters:
  a)    whether the communal open space has usable dimensions and is of a
        sufficient size for the density of the development;
  b)    the development is in proximity to adequate public open space or sufficient
        amenities; and
  c)    whether there is an appropriate increase in private open space provided
        (over that which is required by Clause 5.4.6), for each dwelling in the
        development’.

  At the hearing, Mr Bell explained that due to the trapezoidal shape of the
  site, it was very challenging to meet the minimum 6m wide requirement,
  however, the design provides over and above the required total area for
  communal open space. Mr Mark Bell described the different communal open
  space locations, with the ground floor outdoor area designed to face the
  existing open space to the rear of the lot, a ground floor multi-purpose room
  and covered outdoor space with landscaping at levels 1 and 2. The spaces
  are designed to take advantage of the breezes and the morning and
  afternoon sun.

  The proposed variation to minimum width of the communal open space was
  considered appropriate for the following reasons:

  •        The proposal responds to the unique site constraints through
           providing communal open space in areas of the development that
           would be otherwise underutilised, for example, providing the
           communal open space along the rear boundary of the site.
  •        The proposed area of communal open space complies with the
           minimum area requirements and is of a sufficient size for the scale of
           the development.
  •        All dwellings are provided with private open space that meets the
           minimum area requirements.




                                 Page 29 of 50

 These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
              Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
 Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

  Clause 5.4.17 Building Articulation

  The purpose of the clause is to ‘ensure that residential buildings mitigate the
  perception of building mass and bulking when viewed from adjoining properties
  and the street, and provide opportunities for cross-ventilation within building
  design’.

  With reference to sub-clause 4, a step or recess to the proposed wall along
  the western and eastern boundaries is not provided at level 2 or level 3 of
  the proposed development.

  Administratively, sub-clause 2 specifies that ‘the consent authority may
  consent to a development that is not in accordance with sub-clause 4 only if it is
  satisfied it is consistent with the purpose of this clause’.

  At the hearing, Mr Bell explained that most of the visual interest is provided
  to the front façade, which is articulated through the use of blade walls,
  stepped built form and landscaping.

  Mr Bell further explained that to reduce the bulk of the western wall along
  the boundary, they provided a 2.8m wide breezeway, which effectively splits
  the building into 2 and provides some articulation. In addition, the
  development proposes to use natural materials to provide texture and have
  a geometric pattern to provide some visual relief.

  The proposed variation to the building articulation requirements was
  considered appropriate for the following reasons:

  •        The non-compliant element is limited to level 2 and 3, as levels 4 and
           above are provided with a light / void that provides daylight amenity
           for future occupants of the proposal development, natural daylight
           and ventilation to the buildings communal corridor spaces and
           provides relief to the extent of the blank wall.
  •        The proposed walls will be finished in a banded pattern of alternating
           splitface and fairface coloured blockwork which provides texture and
           articulation minimising the visual bulk.

  Clause 5.5.17 Building Frontage in Commercial and Mixed Use Areas

  The purpose of the clause is to ‘encourage primary frontages of commercial
  buildings to contribute to a pleasant pedestrian environment and provide visual
  connectivity with their surroundings’.

  With reference to sub-clause 6, The proposed building provides an awning
  along the full length of the site boundary and covers the full width of the
  footpath however it is not a minimum of 3m wide.

  Administratively, sub-clause 3 specifies that ‘the consent authority may
  consent to a development that is not in accordance with sub-clause 6 if the
  development provides appropriate shading for pedestrians adjacent to the
  primary frontage’.

                                 Page 30 of 50

 These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
              Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
 Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

  The proposed variation to the awning requirements was considered
  appropriate as the proposed awning covers the full width of the footpath
  and provides appropriate sun and rain protection for pedestrians.

  Clause 5.9.2.2 Volumetric Control

  The purpose of the clause is to ‘ensure the siting and mass of buildings within
  the Darwin city centre promotes urban form that is of a scale appropriate to the
  locality, and provides adequate separation to allow:

  a)       potential for view corridors to Darwin Harbour;
  b)       breeze circulation between buildings;
  c)       penetration of daylight into habitable rooms; and
  d)       reasonable privacy for residents’.

  Sub-clause 5 requires that development be constructed with a podium up to
  25m with 6m setbacks applying to windows to habitable rooms, balconies
  and verandahs only. The podium has a maximum height of 28.2m, therefore
  exceeding the requirement by 3.2m.

  Administratively, sub-clause 3 specifies that ‘the consent authority may
  consent to a development, excluding development located within the Smith
  Street Character Area, that is not in accordance with sub-clauses 5 and 6 if it is
  satisfied the development:
  a)      is appropriate to the location considering the scale of the development and
  b)
  c)      surrounding built form; and
  d)      will not unreasonably restrict the future development of adjoining sites’.

  The proposed variation to the requirement to the podium height was
  considered appropriate for the following reasons:

  •        The non-compliant element is limited to the upper portion of level 9
           and upwards (from 1.9m above finished floor level) which has a
           maximum height of 28.2m, therefore exceeding the requirement by
           3.2m. It is noted that the proposed rooftop plant and associated
           screening do not form part of the building height dimension.
  •        In relation to subclause 3(a), the proposed development is reflective of
           the scale and height of the adjoining properties to the east and given
           these properties existence there is unlikely to be any impact on
           existing view corridors to Darwin Harbour.
  •        In relation to subclause 3(b), the proposed development has been
           designed so that the development potential of the west is not
           impacted, this is through the provision of a blank wall along the
           western boundary with a central light court / void. It is noted that the
           applicant advised that in their opinion any future development of the
           adjoining western property would be setback 3 metres from the
           common boundary due to the presence of a 3 metre wide easement.




                                 Page 31 of 50

 These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
              Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
 Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

  5.9.2.11 Car parking spaces in Darwin City Centre

  The purpose of the clause is to ‘ensure that sufficient off-street car parking
  spaces, constructed to a standard and conveniently located, are provided to
  service the proposed use of a site’.

  Subclause 5 specifies that use and development is to include the minimum
  number of car parking spaces specified in the table to this clause (rounded
  up to the next whole number).

  Dwelling-multiple has a statutory rate of 1 per bed-sitter and one bedroom
  dwelling and 1.5 per two bedroom dwelling and generates a requirement of
  106.5 (rounded up to 107) car parking spaces.

  The proposed development provides 103 car parking spaces and therefore
  has a shortfall of 4 car parking spaces.

  5.9.2.12 Reduction in car parking spaces in Darwin City Centre

  The assessment establishes that pursuant to clause 5.9.2.11 Car parking
  spaces in Darwin City Centre, there is a shortfall of 4 car parking spaces.

  The purpose of clause 5.9.2.12 is ‘to provide for a use or development with
  fewer car parking spaces than required by clause 5.9.2.11 (Car parking spaces in
  Darwin City Centre)’.

  The applicant has sought consent to apply the reductions available pursuant
  to sub-clause 1 and sub-clause 2.

  In accordance with sub-clause 1, the Authority notes that the development
  provides 14 motorcycle spaces and in accordance with sub-clause 1(a),
  determined to reduce the car parking space requirement by 4 car parking
  spaces

  As a result, a reduction of 4 car parking spaces can be applied (106.5 – 4 =
  102.5) and rounded up 103 car parking spaces are required. After applying
  the reduction, the proposed development provides the required amount of
  car parking spaces.

  Clause 5.9.2.13 Design of Car Parking Areas and Vehicle Access

  The purpose of the clause is to ‘promote design of car parking, vehicle access
  points and onsite movement that:
  a)     is easily adapted to meet changing demand;
  b)     minimises visual impact to the street and other public areas; and
  c)     minimises impacts to pedestrian and cyclist movement’.

  The assessment confirms that the proposed development does not comply
  with sub-clause 3, as ground level car parking is proposed for residential
  purposes.


                                 Page 32 of 50

 These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
              Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
 Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
     Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

       Administratively, the ‘consent authority may consent to a development that
       is not in accordance with sub-clauses 3-6 if it is satisfied the use or
       development is appropriate to the site having regard the potential impact on
       the surrounding road network and the amenity of the locality’.

       The proposed variation to the requirement for ground level residential car
       parking was considered appropriate for the following reasons:

       •        The application is accompanied by a traffic impact assessment that
                confirms ‘the additional traffic generated by the development will not
                result in adverse impacts on the surrounding road network. This has
                been confirmed through traffic modelling using SIDRA Intersection 9
                modelling software’.
       •        In addition, the ground floor car parking area has a minimum floor to
                ceiling height of 4 metres which allows the area to be adapted to
                commercial uses should there be a demand in the future.

3.     Pursuant to section 51(1)(j) of the Planning Act 1999, the consent authority
       must take into consideration the capability of the land to which the proposed
       development relates to support the proposed development and the effect of
       the development on the land and on other land, the physical characteristics
       of which may be affected by the development.

       The overall height and scale of the development is consistent with that
       anticipated in the Darwin CBD with respect to the capability of the land and
       the effect on surrounding properties. Additionally, the Department of Lands,
       Planning and Environment (Environment Division) did not identify or raise
       any issues of concern in relation to land capability.
4.     Pursuant to section 51(1)(n) of the Planning Act 1999, the consent authority
       must take into consideration the potential impact on the existing and future
       amenity of the area in which the land is situated.
       Whilst the development will result in a change to the appearance of the
       site (noting the site is currently vacant land), it is consistent with that
       expected in Zone CB (Central Business) as a Merit Assessable development,
       including overall height, scale and residential use proposed. The
       development is noted as similar in scale to the adjoining properties.
       In addition, the proposed walls on boundary have been designed to not
       impact on the development potential of the adjoining property along with
       minimising visual bulk when viewed from adjoining properties through the
       provision of a light / void to provide relief to the extent of the blank wall
       and the proposed finishes in a banded pattern of alternating splitface and
       fairface coloured blockwork which provides texture and articulation,
       minimising any adverse visual impacts.
       Overall, the development is not anticipated to adversely impact the existing
       or future amenity of the area.

FOR: 5                                    AGAINST: 0                                ABSTAIN: 0

ACTION: Notice of Consent and Development Permit

                                      Page 33 of 50

      These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                   Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
      Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
                   Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025



ITEM 5        CONCURRENT APPLICATION
PA2023/0421   REZONE FROM LR (LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL) TO LMR (LOW-MEDIUM
              DENSITY RESIDENTIAL); AND
              4 X 4 BEDROOM DWELLINGS-GROUP IN 2 X 2 STOREY BUILDINGS
              LOT 131 (68) ARALIA STREET, NIGHTCLIFF, TOWN OF NIGHTCLIFF
APPLICANT     Cunnington Rosse Town Planning and Consulting

              Applicant: - Brad Cunnington (Cunnington Rosse Town Planning and
              Consulting) attended.

RESOLVED      That, the Development Consent Authority pursuant to section 30P(1)(a) of the
10/25         Planning Act 1999 decide that, if the Minister were to approve the amendment
              proposal to rezone Lot 131 Town of Nightcliff (68 Aralia Street, Nightcliff) that it
              would be likely to determine to consent to the development under section
              30W(1)(a) conditionally for the purpose of dwelling-group (4 x 4 bedroom) in 2 x
              2 storey buildings subject to the following conditions:

              CONDITIONS PRECEDENT

              1.     Prior to the endorsement of plans and prior to commencement of works
                     (including site preparation), amended plans to the satisfaction of the consent
                     authority must be submitted to and approved by the consent authority.
                     When approved, the plans will be endorsed and will then form part of the
                     permit. The plans must be drawn to scale with dimensions and must be
                     generally in accordance with the plans submitted with the application but
                     modified to show:
                     a)    the proposed 1.8m high blockwork fence complies with AS2890.1, and
                           provides sight lines for pedestrians on the footpath adjacent to the
                           vehicle access.

              2.     Prior to the commencement of works (including site preparation), the
                     applicant is to prepare a dilapidation report covering infrastructure within
                     the road reserve to the requirements of the City of Darwin.

              3.     Prior to the commencement of works (including site preparation), an
                     engineered plan completed by a suitably qualified civil engineer
                     demonstrating the on-site collection of stormwater and its discharge into
                     the local underground stormwater drainage system, shall be submitted to,
                     and approved by the City of Darwin, to the satisfaction of the consent
                     authority. The plan shall include details of site levels, and Council’s
                     stormwater drain connection point/s and connection details.

              4.     Prior to the commencement of works (including site preparation), a waste
                     management plan addressing the City of Darwin’s Waste Management
                     Guidelines must be prepared, to the requirements of the City of Darwin, to
                     the satisfaction of the consent authority.

              5.     Prior to the commencement of works (including site preparation), the
                     applicant is to prepare a Site Construction Management Plan (SCMP) to the

                                                    Page 34 of 50

                    These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                                 Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
                    Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
     Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

       requirements of the City of Darwin, to the satisfaction of the consent
       authority. The SCMP should specifically address the impact to Council
       owned public spaces and include a waste management plan for disposal of
       waste to Shoal Bay, traffic control for affected City of Darwin roads, haulage
       routes, storm water drainage & sediment control, use of City of Darwin land,
       and how this land will be managed during the construction phase.

GENERAL CONDITIONS

6.     The works carried out under this permit shall be in accordance with the
       drawings endorsed as forming part of this permit.

7.     The owner of the land must enter into agreements with the relevant
       authorities for the provision of water supply, drainage, sewerage, electricity
       and telecommunication networks to the development shown on the
       endorsed plan in accordance with the authorities’ requirements and relevant
       legislation at the time.

Please refer to notations 1, 2, 3, and 4 for further information.

8.     Any developments on or adjacent to any easements on site shall be carried
       out to the requirements of the relevant service authority to the satisfaction
       of the consent authority

9.     Upon completion of any works within or impacting upon existing road
       reserves, the infrastructure within the road reserve shall be rehabilitated to
       the standards and requirements of the City of Darwin and returned to the
       condition as documented in the dilapidation report

10. Stormwater is to be collected and discharged into the drainage network to
    the technical standards of and at no cost to the City of Darwin, to the
    satisfaction of the consent authority.

11. Storage for waste disposal bins is to be provided to the requirements of the
    City of Darwin to the satisfaction of the consent authority

12. The kerb crossovers and driveways to the site approved by this permit are
    to meet the technical standards of the City of Darwin, to the satisfaction of
    the consent authority.

13. The owner shall:
    a.   remove disused vehicle and/ or pedestrian crossovers;
    b.   provide footpaths/ cycleways;
    c.   collect stormwater and discharge it to the drainage network; and
    d.   undertake reinstatement works;
         all to the technical requirements of and at no cost to the City of
         Darwin, to the satisfaction of the consent authority.

14. No fence, hedge, tree or other obstruction exceeding a height of 0.6m is to
    be planted or erected so that it would obscure sight lines at the junction of


                                      Page 35 of 50

      These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                   Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
      Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
     Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

       the driveway and the public street to the requirements of the City of Darwin,
       to the satisfaction of the consent authority.

15. Vehicle access to the site must meet City of Darwin requirements, including
    the width and location of the access, as the driveway is not permitted along
    the boundary line.

16. All street trees, including the existing street tree within the Pandanus Street
    road reserve, shall be protected at all times during construction to the
    requirements of the City of Darwin, to the satisfaction of the consent
    authority.

17. Before the use/occupation of the development starts, the landscaping works
    shown on the endorsed plans must be carried out and completed to the
    satisfaction of the consent authority.

18. The private open space areas of each dwelling shall be screened on each
    boundary by:
    a.   the erection of a solid wall or screen fence not less than 1.8 metres
         high; or
    b.   fenced to a height not less than 1.8 metres high and planted with
         dense vegetation

19. All air conditioning condensers (including any condenser units required to be
    added or replaced in the future) are to be appropriately screened from public
    view, located so as to minimise thermal and acoustic impacts on
    neighbouring properties and condensate disposed of to ground level in a
    controlled manner to the satisfaction of the consent authority.

20. The landscaping shown on the endorsed plans must be maintained to the
    satisfaction of the consent authority, including that any dead, diseased or
    damaged plants are to be replaced.

NOTES

1.     The Power and Water Corporation advises that the Water and Sewer
       Services Development Section (waterdevelopment@powerwater.com.au)
       and         Power           Network           Engineering     Section
       (powerdevelopment@powerwater.com.au) should be contacted via email a
       minimum of 1 month prior to construction works commencing in order to
       determine the Corporation’s servicing requirements, and the need for
       upgrading of on-site and/or surrounding infrastructure.

2.     Power and Water Corporation advise that prior to initial reviews and
       assessments being undertaken to determine Power and Water Corporations
       servicing requirements, the developer should submit an Expression of
       Interest (EoI) form via email to remotedevelopment@powerwater.com.au

3.     All developers, including owner-builders, are required to comply with
       Commonwealth telecommunications requirements. Under Commonwealth
       law, developers are generally required to provide fibre-ready pit and pipe in

                                      Page 36 of 50

      These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                   Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
      Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
     Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

       their developments at their expense. Developers may be able to access an
       exemption from these arrangements in some circumstances. For more
       information visit www.infrastructure.gov.au/tind

4.     If you choose nbn to service your development, you will need to enter into
       a development agreement with nbn. The first step is to register the
       development via http://www.nbnco.com.au/develop-or-plan-with-the-
       nbn/new-developments.html once registered nbn will be in contact to
       discuss the specific requirements for the development. Nbn requires you to
       apply at least 3 months before any civil works commence. All
       telecommunications infrastructure should be built to nbn guidelines found
       at          http://www.nbnco.com.au/develop-or-plan-with-the-nbn/new-
       developments/builders-designers.html

5.     Any proposed works on/over City of Darwin property shall be subject to
       separate application to City of Darwin and shall be carried out to the
       requirements and satisfaction of City of Darwin.

6.     Designs and specifications for landscaping of the road verges adjacent to the
       property shall be submitted for approval by City of Darwin and all approved
       works shall be constructed at the applicant’s expense, to the requirements
       of City of Darwin.

7.     In accordance with City of Darwin By-Laws, prior to occupation, the
       applicant shall ensure that a building number is displayed in a position clearly
       visible from the street. The number must be visible against the background
       on which it is placed, to the satisfaction and at no cost to City of Darwin.

8.     City of Darwin advises that all street trees shall be protected at all times
       during construction. Any tree on a footpath, which is damaged or removed
       during construction, shall be replaced, to the satisfaction of the General
       Manager Infrastructure, City of Darwin. A Tree Protection Zone (TPZ) shall
       be constructed for all existing trees to be retained within the development,
       in accordance with Australian Standards – AS 4970-2009 “Protection of
       Trees on Development Sites”. Copies of AS 4970-2009 “Protection of Trees
       on Development Sites” can be obtained from the Australian Standards
       website.

REASONS FOR THE DECISION

1.     Pursuant to sections 30P(2)(a) and (b) of the Planning Act 1999, the consent
       authority must take into account any planning scheme that applies to the
       land to which the application relates and the amendment proposal contained
       within the application.

       Section 51 sub-clause 3 states that when considering a development
       application under subsection (1), the consent authority must apply the
       relevant considerations to only those components of the development that
       triggered the requirement for consent under the planning scheme.




                                      Page 37 of 50

      These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                   Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
      Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
     Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

       Northern Territory Planning Scheme 2020 (NTPS 2020)

       The application is Merit Assessable under sub-clause 1(b)(i) of Clause 1.8 of
       the NTPS2020, as the ‘dwelling-group (3+)’ land use is shown as Merit
       Assessable in Zone LMR (Low Medium Density Residential).

       The exercise of discretion by the Development Consent Authority for this
       development application is set out in sub-clause 3 of Clause 1.10, which
       specifies that:

       In considering an application for consent for a use or development identified as
       Merit Assessable the consent authority must take into account all of the
       following:
       a)    the relevant requirements, including the purpose of the requirements, as
             set out in Parts 5 or 6;
       b)    any Overlays and associated requirements in Part 3 that apply to the land;
             and
       c)    the guidance provided by the relevant zone purpose and outcomes in Part
             4 relevant to a variation of requirements in Parts 5 or 6.

       Part 3 – Overlays

       There are no overlays applicable to the site, thus Part 3 of NTPS2020 is not
       applicable.

       Part 5 – Development Requirements

       The Authority notes the assessment of DAS which assessed the
       development proposal against the requirements of the Northern Territory
       Planning Scheme 2020 (NTPS 2020), where applicable requirements include
       Clauses 5.2.1 (General Height Control), 5.2.4 (Car Parking), 5.2.6
       (Landscaping), 5.4.1 (Residential Density), 5.4.3 (Building Setbacks of
       Residential Buildings and Ancillary Structures), 5.4.6 (Private Open Space),
       5.4.8 (Residential Building Design), and 5.4.17 (Building Articulation).

       These clauses have been considered and it is found that the proposal
       complies with all relevant requirements of the NTPS 2020.

2.     Pursuant to Section 30P(2)(j) of the Planning Act 1999, the consent authority
       must take into account the capability of the land to support the development
       proposal and the effect of the proposal on the land, and on other land, the
       physical characteristics of which may be affected by the proposal.

       Dwelling-group is an expected form of development within Zone LMR. The
       land is not impacted by any overlays, with no structures proposed on or over
       the sewerage easement on-site. Service authorities did not identify any
       issues of concern in relation to land capability that would not ordinarily be
       addressed via standard conditions on a permit. Additionally, the Department
       of Lands, Planning and Environment (Environment Division) did not identify
       or raise any issues of concern in relation to land capability. The land is
       capable of supporting the proposed development.

                                      Page 38 of 50

      These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                   Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
      Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
                Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

           3.     Pursuant to Section 30P(2)(k) of the Planning Act 1999, the consent authority
                  must take into consideration the capability of the public utilities or
                  infrastructure provided in the area in which the land is situated and any
                  requirement for public facilities and services to be connected to the land;
                  and facilities, infrastructure or land to be provided by the applicant.

                  The site is in close proximity to public open spaces, commercial areas,
                  community facilities, and recreational amenities, with convenient access to
                  public transport. There is no requirement for the provision of public facilities
                  or open space as part of the application.

           4.     Pursuant to Section 30P(2)(m) of the Planning Act 1999, the consent
                  authority must take into account the potential impact on the existing and
                  future amenity of the area in which the land is situated.

                  No adverse impacts on the existing and future amenity of the area are
                  foreseen as a result of the proposed development, with the proposal
                  considered to comply with the purpose and outcomes of the Zone LMR. This
                  form of development is compatible with the existing character of the locality
                  in Nightcliff.

RESOLVED   That pursuant to section 30Q of the Planning Act 1999, the consent authority
11/25      report to the Minister for Lands, Planning and Environment advising of the likely
           decision in relation to the development proposal, issues raised in the submissions,
           issues raised at the hearing and any other matters it considers the Minister should
           take into account when considering the amendment proposal.


RESOLVED   That, pursuant to section 86(1) of the Planning Act 1999, the Development
12/25      Consent Authority delegates its powers to the Chair or in the absence of the
           Chair any member of the Darwin Division of the Authority to:

           •      determine pursuant to Section 30W(1)(a) to consent to the development
                  proposal contained in the concurrent application and consent to the
                  concurrent application after receipt of a notice under Section 30U(1) that
                  the Minister has approved the amendment proposal contained in the
                  application;
           •      issue a development permit under section 54(1) in relation to the
                  development proposal to develop Lot 131 (68) Aralia Street , Nightcliff,
                  Town of Nightcliff for the purpose of dwelling-group (4 x 4 bedroom) in 2 x
                  2 storey buildings; and
           •      issue the relevant notices under Section 30Y.

           FOR: 5                                    AGAINST: 0                                ABSTAIN: 0

           ACTION: Report to the Minister




                                                 Page 39 of 50

                 These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                              Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
                 Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
                   Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

ITEM 6
              ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS TO AN EXISTING SERVICE STATION
PA2024/0389
              LOT 9576 (247) TROWER ROAD, CASUARINA, TOWN OF NIGHTCLIFF
APPLICANT     Cunnington Rosse Town Planning and Consulting

              Applicant: - Brad Cunnington (Cunnington Rosse Town Planning and
              Consulting) attended.

RESOLVED      That, the Development Consent Authority vary the requirements of clauses
13/25         5.2.4.1 (Car parking spaces), 5.2.4.4 (Layout of car parking area), 5.2.6.1
              (Landscaping in zones other than Zone CB), 5.5.8 (Service station), and 5.5.15
              (Design in commercial and mixed use areas) of the Northern Territory Planning
              Scheme 2020, and pursuant to section 53(a) of the Planning Act 1999, consent to
              the application to develop Lot 9576 (247) Trower Road, Casuarina, Town of
              Nightcliff for the purpose of alterations and additions to an existing service
              station, subject to the following conditions:

              CONDITIONS PRECEDENT

              1.     Prior to the commencement of works (including site preparation), a traffic
                     impact assessment is to be prepared by a suitably qualified traffic engineer
                     with attention to the modelling of the adjacent intersection and the upgrade
                     to the Trower Road and Dripstone Road intersection, and identifying any
                     necessary upgrades to the surrounding street network to the requirements
                     of the Transport and Civil Services Division (TCSD), of the Department of
                     Logistics and Infrastructure (DLI), to the satisfaction of the consent authority.

              2.     Prior to the commencement of works (including site preparation), a
                     schematic plan demonstrating the on-site collection of stormwater and its
                     discharge into the City of Darwin and/or TCSD, DLI stormwater drainage
                     system shall be submitted to and approved by the relevant service authority,
                     to the satisfaction of the consent authority. The plan shall include details of
                     site levels and relevant stormwater drain connection point(s). The plan shall
                     also indicate how stormwater will be collected on the site and connected
                     underground to the relevant stormwater drainage system.

              GENERAL CONDITIONS

              3.     The works carried out under this permit shall be in accordance with the
                     drawing numbered 2024/0389/01 endorsed as forming part of this permit.

              4.     The owner of the land must enter into agreements with the relevant
                     authorities for the provision of water supply, drainage, sewerage, and
                     electricity to the development shown on the endorsed plan in accordance
                     with the authorities’ requirements and relevant legislation at the time. Please
                     refer to notation 3 for more information.

              5.     Any developments on or adjacent to any easements on site shall be carried
                     out to the requirements of the relevant service authority to the satisfaction
                     of the consent authority.


                                                    Page 40 of 50

                    These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                                 Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
                    Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
     Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

6.     All works recommended by the traffic impact assessment are to be
       completed to the requirements of TCSD, DLI, to the satisfaction of the
       consent authority.

7.     Stormwater is to be collected and discharged into the drainage network to
       the technical standards of and at no cost to the City of Darwin and/or TCSD,
       DLI, to the satisfaction of the consent authority.

8.     Upon completion of any works within or impacting upon the Trower Road
       road reserve, the road reserve shall be rehabilitated to the standards and
       requirements of TCSD, DLI.

9.      Before the use or occupation of the development starts, the area(s) set-aside
        for the parking of vehicles and access lanes as shown on the endorsed plans
        must be:
       (a)    constructed;
       (b)    properly formed to such levels that they can be used in accordance
              with the plans;
       (c)    surfaced with an all-weather-seal coat;
       (d)    drained;
       (e)    line marked to indicate each car space and all access lanes; and
       (f)    clearly marked to show the direction of traffic along access lanes and
              driveways
              to the satisfaction of the consent authority.

10. Car parking spaces, access lanes and driveways must be kept available for
    these purposes at all times.

11. ‘No entry’ and ‘No exit’ signs and arrows directing the internal traffic
    movement on site shall be provided at completion of building to the
    requirements and satisfaction of the consent authority.

12. Before the use/occupation of the development starts, the landscaping works
    shown on the endorsed plans must be carried out and completed to the
    satisfaction of the consent authority.

13. The landscaping shown on the endorsed plans must be maintained to the
    satisfaction of the consent authority, including that any dead, diseased or
    damaged plants are to be replaced.

14. All air conditioning condensers (including any condenser units required to be
    added or replaced in the future) are to be appropriately screened from public
    view, located so as to minimise thermal and acoustic impacts on
    neighbouring properties and condensate disposed of to ground level in a
    controlled manner to the satisfaction of the consent authority.

15. All pipes, fixtures, fittings and vents servicing any building on the site must
    be concealed in service ducts or otherwise hidden from view to the
    satisfaction of the consent authority




                                      Page 41 of 50

      These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                   Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
      Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
     Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

NOTES

1.     The traffic impact assessment should specifically address the following
       issues relating to the Trower Road southern access and Trower Road /
       Dripstone Road intersection and provide recommendations:
       a.    Proximity of the access to the intersection and its impact on the
             intersection capacity, traffic and road user / motorists safety at the
             access.
       b.    Detailed analysis of the intersection traffic performance and the
             development’s impact on the intersections performance within a 10
             year design horizon.
       c.    Swept path diagrams for the maximum sized vehicles intended to
             access the lot, to demonstrate that access are appropriately sized,
             vehicles are capable of entering and leaving the development site in
             forward gear and shall cause no disruption to traffic, queuing or
             adverse impact on the safety of the road network.

2.     The Transport and Civil Services Division, Department of Logistics and
       Infrastructure has advised that:
       a.    A development permit issued under the Planning Act 1999 is not an
             approval for access onto a Territory Road. Approval for access to be
             taken from, or constructed within the NTG controlled road reserves
             rests solely with TCSD, DLI, as the approving road authority. This
             extends to construction and delivery vehicles, which shall not be
             parked on public road reserves.
       b.    Access to the site shall be via the existing driveways. No additional
             access from Trower Road shall be permitted by TCSD, DLI.
       c.    The finish of any Prime Identification sign, if erected, shall be such
             that, if illuminated, day and night readability is the same and is of
             constant display (i.e. not flashing or variable message).
       d.    The sign shall be positioned:
       e.    so as not to create sun or headlight reflection to motorists; and
       f.    be located entirely (including foundations and aerially) within the
             subject lot.
       g.    Advertising signage, either permanent or temporary, such as ‘A’
             frame, vehicle or trailer mounted shall not be erected or located
             within the Trower Road road reserve.
       h.    Any floodlighting or security lighting provided on site is to be
             shielded in a manner to prevent the lighting being noticeable or
             causing nuisance to Trower Road traffic
       i.    No polluted and/or sediment laden run-off is to be discharged
             directly or indirectly into City of Darwin or TCSD, DLI drains or to
             any watercourse.
       j.    Any proposed work (including the provision or connection of
             services, or upgrade/resurfacing of footpaths) within, or impacting
             upon the Trower Road road reserve shall be in accordance with the
             standards and specifications of TCSD, DLI. Design documents must
             be submitted to TCSD for Road Agency Approval and no works are
             to commence prior to approval and receipt of a ‘Permit to Work
             Within a Road Reserve’


                                      Page 42 of 50

      These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                   Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
      Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
     Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

       k.       The loads of all trucks entering and leaving the site of works are to
                be constrained in such a manner as to prevent the dropping or
                tracking of materials onto streets. This includes ensuring that all
                wheels, tracks and body surfaces are free of mud and other
                contaminants before entering onto the sealed road network. Where
                tracked material on the road pavement becomes a potential safety
                issue, the developer will be obliged to sweep and clean material off
                the road.

3.     The Power and Water Corporation advises that the Water and Sewer
       Services Development Section (waterdevelopment@powerwater.com.au)
       and         Power           Network           Engineering     Section
       (powerdevelopment@powerwater.com.au) should be contacted via email a
       minimum of 1 month prior to construction works commencing in order to
       determine the Corporation’s servicing requirements, and the need for
       upgrading of on-site and/or surrounding infrastructure.

4.     Notwithstanding the approved plans, all signage is subject to the City of
       Darwin approval, at no cost to Council.

5.     There are statutory obligations under the Waste Management and Pollution
       Control Act 1998 (WMPC Act) that require all persons to take all measures
       that are reasonable and practicable to prevent or minimise pollution or
       environmental harm and reduce the amount of waste. The proponent is
       required to comply at all times with the WMPC Act, including the General
       Environmental Duty under section 12 of the WMPC Act. There is also
       requirement to obtain an authorisation prior to conducting any of the
       activities listed in Schedule 2 of the WMPC Act. Guidelines to assist
       proponents to avoid environmental impacts are available on the Northern
       Territory Environment Protection Authority (NT EPA) website
       https://ntepa.nt.gov.au/publications-and-advice/environmental-
       management. To help satisfy the General Environmental Duty, the
       proponent is advised to take notice of the list of environmental
       considerations below. The list is not exhaustive and the proponent is
       responsible for ensuring their activities do not result in non-compliance with
       the WMPC Act. The WMPC Act, administered by the NT EPA, is separate to
       and not reduced or affected in any way by other legislation administered by
       other departments or authorities. The NT EPA may take enforcement action
       or issue statutory instruments should there be non-compliance with the
       WMPC Act.

6.     This development permit is not an approval to undertake building work. You
       are advised to contact a Northern Territory registered building certifier to
       seek a building permit as required by the Northern Territory Building Act
       1993 before commencing any demolition or construction works.

7.     Any proposed works which fall within the scope of the Construction Industry
       Long Service Leave and Benefits Act 2005 must be notified to NT Build by
       lodgement of the required Project Notification Form. Payment of any levy
       must be made prior to the commencement of any construction activity. NT


                                      Page 43 of 50

      These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                   Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
      Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
     Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

       Build should be contacted via email (info@ntbuild.com.au) or by phone on
       08 89364070 to determine if the proposed works are subject to the Act.

REASONS FOR THE DECISION

1.     Pursuant to section 51(1)(a) of the Planning Act 1999, the consent authority
       must take into consideration the planning scheme that applies to the land to
       which the application relates.

       The NT Planning Scheme 2020 applies to the land and service station
       requires consent under clause 1.8 (When development consent is required).
       It is identified as Impact Assessable under clause 1.8(1)(c)(i), therefore the
       strategic framework (Part 2 of the Scheme, including Darwin Regional Land
       Use Plan 2015, zone purpose and outcomes of clause 4.11 Zone C
       (Commercial), and clauses 5.2.1 (General height control), 5.2.4.1 (Car parking
       spaces), 5.2.4.4 (Car parking layout), 5.2.4.5 (Vehicle access and on-site
       parking for dwellings-single on lots less 600m2 but not less than 300m2),
       5.2.5 (Loading bays), 5.2.6.1 (Landscaping in zones other than Zone CB),
       5.2.6.2 (Landscaping in Zone CB), 5.2.7 (Setbacks for development adjacent
       to land in zones LR, LMR, MR or HR), 5.3.7 (End of trip facilities in zones HR,
       CB, C, SC and TC), 5.5.2 (Commercial plot ratio), 5.5.4 (Expansion of existing
       developments in zones CB, C, SC and TC), 5.5.8 (Service station), 5.5.15
       (Design in commercial and mixed use areas) and 5.5.17 (Building frontage in
       commercial and mixed use areas), need to be considered.

       The Authority noted the assessment completed by Development
       Assessment Services (DAS), which concludes the proposal complies with the
       relevant requirements of the NTPS 2020 except for clauses 5.2.4.1 (Car
       parking spaces), 5.2.4.4 (Car parking layout), 5.5.8 (Service station), and
       5.5.15 (Design in Commercial and Mixed Use Areas).

       Mr Brad Cunnington from Cunnington Rosse Town Planning Consultants
       (applicant) attended the meeting, and spoke further to the application, and
       provided an overview of the proposed development.
       Part 2 – Strategic Framework

       The Darwin Regional Land Use Plan (DRLUP) 2015 applies to the subject
       site. The purpose of the DRLUP is to identify the essential characteristics
       and needs that will shape future development in the region and establish an
       overarching framework for that development. The location of the proposed
       development is in an area identified for ‘urban/peri-urban’ land use.

       These areas are intended to accommodate a full range of land uses, from
       residential to commercial uses. The proposed development is for the
       alterations and additions to an existing service station, which will continue
       to provide retail and refuelling services for the area and is consistent with
       the purpose of the DRLUP. The scale of the development is considered
       appropriate to the service function of Casuarina as a regional centre.

       Mr Cunnington explained that the development is the refurbishment of an
       existing service station premises, primarily by increasing the number of fuel

                                      Page 44 of 50

      These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                   Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
      Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
     Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

       bowsers, and the expansion of the ancillary, convenience retail into premises
       previously used as a motor repair station (abandoned since 2011). Mr
       Cunnington suggested that this application represents an opportunity to tidy
       up a run-down site, and may support the aspirations of the underlying
       landowner, Sentinel Group.

       Part 4 – Clause 4.11 Zone C (Commercial)

       The proposal is for alterations and additions to an existing service station, on
       the same property as and adjacent to an existing shopping centre. The
       existing shopping centre includes a mix of shops, food premises, eateries and
       services in a manner and at a scale consistent with its position as a primary
       activity centre. The proposal will improve the amenity of the refuelling
       services provided in the locality, by removing an abandoned use, and
       refurbishing the service station.

       The application was circulated to several service authorities, including the
       Transport and Civil Services Division (TCSD) of the Department of Logistics
       and Infrastructure (DLI) and the City of Darwin for their comments regarding
       impact on the local road network.

       The proposed building design provides variety and interest at street level
       through a reduction in general car parking areas, and additional fuel bowsers.
       Passive surveillance opportunities are provided through increased retail
       footprint of the service station, and inclusion of transparent glass frontage.
       The building design minimises the expanse of blank wall through the use of
       windows, entrances signage, awnings and varied heights to the façade along
       Trower Road and Dripstone Road. The proposal complies with the height
       requirements for the site. The scale of the development is considered
       appropriate to the service function of Casuarina as a regional centre and is
       sufficiently separated from sensitive land uses including residential uses to
       the east of Trower Road.

       Part 5 – Development requirements

       The Authority noted the DAS assessment of the proposal found that it
       complies with the relevant requirements of the NTPS 2020, with the
       exception of clauses 5.2.4.1 (Car parking spaces), 5.2.4.4 (Car parking layout),
       5.5.8 (Service station), and 5.5.15 (Design in Commercial and Mixed Use
       Areas). This has been discussed further under reason (2).

2.     Pursuant to Clause 1.10 (Exercise of Discretion by the Consent Authority),
       subclause 5 of the NT Planning Scheme 2020, the consent authority may
       consent to a proposed development which is not in accordance with a
       requirement set out in Parts 3, 5 or 6 only if it is satisfied that the variation is
       appropriate having regard to:
       a)       The purpose and administration clauses of the requirement; and
       b)       The considerations listed under Clause 1.10(3) or 1.10(4).




                                      Page 45 of 50

      These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                   Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
      Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

  In response to clause 1.10(5)(a), variations to the clauses listed in paragraph
  (1) are considered appropriate as discussed below.

  Clause 5.2.4.1 (Car parking spaces)

  The purpose of this clause is to Ensure that sufficient off-street car parking,
  constructed to a standard and conveniently located, are provided to service the
  proposed use of a site.

  Clause 5.2.4.1(4) requires that a Use and development is to include the
  minimum number of car parking spaces specified in the table to this clause
  (rounded up to the next whole number) [where 8.8 (9) car parking spaces are
  calculated] where only 6 car parking spaces are provided on-site.

  Administratively, sub-clause (2) states The consent authority may consent to a
  use or development that is not in accordance with sub-clause 4 if it is satisfied a
  reduction of the number of car parking spaces is appropriate with regard to:
  (a) the zoning of the land, the use or development or proposed use or
  development of the land, and the possible future use or development of the land;
  (b) the provision of car parking spaces in the vicinity of the land;
  c) the availability of public transport in the vicinity of the land; and
  (d) the potential impact on the surrounding road network and the amenity of the
  locality and adjoining property;

  In response to sub-clause (a), in addition to the application, Mr Cunnington
  advised that the provision of 26 fuel bowsers, locations for which the
  majority of cars utilising the retail space will park their vehicles, are not
  included in the calculation. As such, the subject site can be reasonably
  considered as providing sufficient car parking for future site users, as most
  users of the service station will be parked at the fuel bowsers, and do not
  remain on-site for extended periods of time.

  In addition, Mr Cunnington advised that the future operator of the service
  station don’t offer trailer rentals, thereby returning two car parking spaces
  for visitors, compared to what currently occurs on-site. The Authority also
  noted that as the site no longer contains a motor repair station, the number
  of visitors (including those who remain at the premises of extended periods
  of time), have likely decreased from what was previously approved.

  In response to sub-clause (b), the area subject to this application is located
  immediately adjacent the lower level of the multi-storey car parking facility
  associated the Casuarina Square shopping centre.

  In response to sub-clause (c), the site is located less than 700 m from the
  Casuarina interchange. However, it is reasonably considered that the
  majority of site users will be those who arrive at the development in vehicles,
  or are walking past.

  In response to sub-clause (d), the development will result in an intensification
  of site use, on a prominent street corner. A permit condition has been applied


                                 Page 46 of 50

 These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
              Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
 Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

  to the development permit requiring that a traffic impact assessment, to the
  standards of TCSD, DLI, is completed prior to the commence of site works.

  Based on the above discussion, the proposed variation is clause 5.2.4.1 (Car
  parking spaces) is acceptable, as the shortfall in car parking spaces is not
  considered likely to result in adverse impacts to local street network.

  Clause 5.2.4.4 (Layout of car parking area)

  The purpose of this clause is to Ensure that a car parking area is appropriately
  designed, constructed and maintained for its intended purpose.

  Clause 5.2.4.4(6) requires that A car parking area is to: (a) be not less than 3m
  from any lot boundary abutting a road; …., where approximately a 2 m buffer
  is provided adjacent two car parking spaces.

  Administratively, sub-clause (3) states The consent authority can he consent
  authority may consent to a car parking area that is not in accordance with sub-
  clause 6 if it is satisfied that the non-compliance will not unreasonably impact on
  the amenity of the surrounding locality.

  In response to sub-clause (3), a variation to this clause is considered
  appropriate as no reduction to the existing landscaped buffer between the
  car parking/bowser area and property boundary is proposed. In addition, it
  is considered that the proposed ‘new low height planting to landscaping
  beds’ will likely increase the visual appeal of the subject site from the public
  domain. Mr Cunnington supported a variation to this clause, as although the
  landscaping will be less than that required under the NTPS 2020, this
  application will result in the re-establishment of the garden beds, thereby
  improving the local amenity.

  In addition, sub-clause (8) requires that The layout of a car parking area is to:
  (d) ensure parking spaces at the end of and perpendicular to a driveway are 3.5m
  wide or so that the driveway projects 1m beyond the last parking space, where
  there is an instance of only a 0.6 m projection provided adjacent to the car
  parking space located along the north-western site boundary.

  Administratively, sub-clause (4) states The consent authority may consent to a
  car parking area that is not in accordance with sub-clauses 7 and 8 if it is satisfied
  that the design and construction is safe and functional with regard to the location
  of the development.

  In response to sub-clause (4), it is noted that the car parking area that
  affected by this clause contains one car parking space, that will likely be
  utilised by vehicles entering from the one-way entrance of Dripstone Road.
  This one space is located over 18 m from the one-way driveway entrance,
  and as such, it is considered unlikely that a vehicle performing a reversing
  manoeuvre would cause a conflict with vehicles entering the site.

  In addition to the non-compliances, the Authority requested that Mr
  Cunnington explain the flow of traffic on-site. Mr Cunnington advised that

                                 Page 47 of 50

 These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
              Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
 Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

  although no changes were proposed to the site accesses (one-way entrances
  and exits), which are not ideal, this application represents an opportunity to
  complete renewed line marking, which would improve site safety.

  The Authority then queried whether the refuelling vehicles would be able to
  safely navigate and leave the site. Mr Cunnington advised that condition
  precedent 1, which concerned the completion of a traffic impact assessment,
  would detail the swept path movements of all vehicles accessing the site,
  and be to the satisfaction of TCSD, who have responsibility for Trower Road.

  Based on the above discussions, a variation to clause 5.2.4.4 (Car parking
  layout) is acceptable, as the non-compliances are considered minor in scale,
  and the proposed car parking layout conforms with the layout that has
  performed adequately to date.

  Clause 5.5.8 (Service station)

  The purpose of this clause is to Ensure that a service station: (a) is developed in
  a location that provides convenient access and does not interfere with the safe
  and efficient operation of the local road, cycle and footpath network; (b) does
  not, because of appearance or the emission of fumes, noise or light, unreasonably
  affect the use and enjoyment of the site and adjacent land; (c) incorporates
  appropriate site layout, building and landscape design to ensure that there are no
  unreasonable impacts on the anticipated amenity of land adjacent to the land on
  which the development is taking place; (d) incorporates best practice
  environmental management measures to prevent contamination of land,
  stormwater, groundwater and air; and (e) responds to existing and anticipated
  development on the site and adjacent land.

  Clause 5.5.8(1) requires that Fuel bowsers associated with the service station
  are visually screened, where no screening is proposed.

  Administratively, sub-clause (1) states The consent authority may consent to a
  service station that is not in accordance with sub-clauses 2-4 only if it is satisfied
  it is consistent with the purpose of this clause and the zone purpose and
  outcomes, and it is appropriate to the site, having regard to such matters as its
  location, nature, scale and impact on surrounding amenity.

  In response to sub-clause (1), it is standard for fuel bowsers to be visible from
  the adjacent public domain. Although this application proposes the addition
  of new fuel bowsers, it is reasonably considered unfeasible for the bowsers
  to be screened in a way that screens them from the public domain, based on
  the existing site layout. In addition, the Authority notes that including the
  provision of screening around fuel bowsers may reduce the potential of
  passive surveillance, and create areas of potential entrapment at the site.

  Based on this, a variation to clause 5.5.8(1) is acceptable, as the non-
  compliance is reasonably expected for this type of land use, and unlikely to
  have a tangible impact on local amenity.




                                 Page 48 of 50

 These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
              Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
 Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

  In addition, clause 5.5.8(3) requires that Street frontages, except access
  driveways or footpaths, are to be landscaped to a minimum depth of 3m, where
  approximately 2 to 3 metres of landscaping is proposed, that what currently
  exists.

  In response to sub-clause (1), it is considered that as this application does
  not propose any further reduction to the landscaping buffer between the car
  parking/fuel bowser area, and that the application will result in new low
  height planting.

  Based on the above discussions, variation to clause 5.5.8 (Service station) is
  acceptable, as the application will not reduce the existing landscaping
  amount, and through this application, will improve the landscaping outcomes
  at the site.

  Clause 5.5.15 (Design in commercial and mixed use areas)

  The purpose of this clause is to Encourage a diverse mix of commercial and
  mixed use developments that are safe, contribute to the activity and amenity of
  commercial centres, are appropriately designed for the local climate, and
  minimise conflicts between different land uses within and surrounding the
  commercial centre.

  Clause 5.5.15(16) requires that Car parking areas, including …. open expanses
  of pavement are to be shaded by landscaping and/or shade structures, where no
  shade structures are proposed for the car parking spaces, and landscaping
  will be ‘low height planting’.

  Administratively, sub-clause (4) states The consent authority may consent to a
  development that is not in accordance with sub-clause 16 if it is satisfied that the
  development provides an appropriate level of shading that reduces heat capture
  of paved surfaces, having regard to the location of the site and scale of the
  development.

  In response to sub-clause (4), this application is considered minor in scale, by
  virtue that only 6 car parking spaces are provided. In addition, it is noted that
  the two large canopies will provided shading for 630 m2 of pavement, in
  which the majority of vehicles utilising the site will be parked.

  Based on the above discussion, the proposed variation is clause 5.5.15
  (Design in commercial and mixed use areas) is acceptable, as the scale of this
  application is minor in scale, and shading will be provided for the majority of
  vehicles utilising the development.

  In response to clause 1.10(5)(b), the considerations listed under Clause
  1.10(4) have been given regard to and it has been found that the proposal
  complies with all relevant requirements of the NTPS 2020, except for the
  non-compliances as discussed above.




                                 Page 49 of 50

 These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
              Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
 Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
                      Darwin DCA Meeting No 436 – Friday 7 February 2025

                 3.     Pursuant to section 51(1)(j) of the Planning Act 1999, the consent authority
                        must take into consideration the capability of the land to which the proposed
                        development relates to support the proposed development and the effect of
                        the development on the land and on other land, the physical characteristics
                        of which may be affected by the development.

                        The subject lot is connected to reticulated power, water and sewerage, and
                        is reasonably considered capable of supporting the proposed development.
I                       In addition, it is noted that no non-standard land capability concerns were
                        identified by service authorities.

                        The Authority note that the conditions on the permit will reasonably address
                        land capability concerns identified by the relevant service authorities.

                 4.     Pursuant to section 51(1)(n) of the Planning Act 1999, the consent authority
                        must take into consideration the potential impact on the existing and future
                        amenity of the area in which the land is situated.

                        The impact on amenity should be considered in context of the site and its
                        surrounds. The application is for the minor intensification of a development
                        that has existed for some time as the subject site, and is reasonably expected
                        in the locality. As such, the Authority considered that the application will not
                        likely detract from the existing and future amenity at the site.

                 FOR: 5                                    AGAINST: 0                                ABSTAIN: 0

                 ACTION: Notice of Consent and Development Permit


RATIFIED AS A RECORD OF ATTENDANCE AND DETERMINATIONS MADE AT THE MEETING


                  Suzanne Philip
                  2025.02.14
    .' I




                  14:11:23 +09'30'
SUZANNE PHILIP
Chair
14 February 2025




                                                       Page 50 of 50

                       These minutes record persons in attendance at the meeting and the resolutions of the
                                    Development Consent Authority on applications before it.
                       Reliance on these minutes should be limited to exclude uses of an evidentiary nature.
